See, it s a kind of crime scene, as if the mind were a dime novel, a scrim of need and semen, all cinder and siren, a dim prison where the miser dines on rinds of desire, and the sinner, sincere as denim, repeats Eden s demise   that luckless toss of dice. Yet here at the rim of this demesne a mitigating mise-en-sc ne: a close-up of her mother stirring rice, a glass of sparkling cider, a mince pie spliced in   not to rescind or mend: what mind denies mercies mine in the end.

I was listening to a book on tape while driving and when the author said,  Those days I delighted in everything,  I pulled over and found a pencil and a parking ticket stub because surely there was a passage of life where I thought  These days I delight in everything,  right there in the present, because they almost all feel like that now, memory having markered only the outline while evaporating the inner anxieties of earlier times. Did I not disparage my body for years on end, for instance, although, in contrast that younger one now strikes me as near-Olympian? And the crushing preoccupations of that same younger self might seem magically diluted, as though a dictator in hindsight, had only been an overboard character    but not so. Where went the fear, dense as the sudden dark in the woods, of being alone, or the bruise of 3:30 pm in a silent apartment, when the disenfranchised live only with the sunlight through the blinds, just prey caught betwixt and between, and also heartbreak, and again, heartbreak. I didn t have whatever that time of life then demanded   a book, a wedding band, a baby    but the present, like the lie of  fair and balanced  news reporting where creationists are granted air time with the scientists, the present might have me believe that  in those days I delighted in everything.  But to be ... fair and balanced ... I do trust the strict part of memory, the only archivist to have savored a passage of time and have preserved it with the translucent green hinges licked by stamp collectors, attaching it without hurting it, so I wanted the quote exactly, and go back to hunt and tag those months where I delighted in everything   then I couldn t find the ticket stub. I rummaged through the recycling but no luck, and I couldn t go back to find the passage on tape, and then I realized I had bought the book for my husband, so I started leafing through it, not wanting to start too far back, and not wanting my eyes to fall on a passage in the future, the one where she realizes that  Those days I delighted in everything,  but it was never to happen again, just the present, from here on in.

there are fat wet vines creeping into myhouse through the pipes and throughhouse through the pipes and throughthe walls gentle as blue flames they curl intothe walls gentle as blue flames they curl into my living there is ice in my attic sugar on mytile I am present and useless like a nose torntile I am present and useless like a nose tornfrom a face and set in a bowl whenfrom a face and set in a bowl whenI saw God I used the wrong pronounsI saw God I used the wrong pronounsGod bricked up my mouthholeGod bricked up my mouthholehis fists were white as gold there werehis fists were white as gold there wereroaches in my beard now I live like a widowroaches in my beard now I live like a widow every day a heave of knitting patternsand sex toys my family speaks of meand sex toys my family speaks of mewith such pride noonesh to roghane they saywith such pride noonesh to roghane they saynoonesh to roghanehis bread is in oil I thank them for that andhis bread is in oilfor their chromosomes most of whichfor their chromosomes most of whichhave been lovely I am lovely too my bodyhave been lovely I am lovely too my bodyis hard and choked with juice like a plasticis hard and choked with juice like a plasticthroat stuffed with real grapes my turn-onsthroat stuffed with real grapes my turn-onsinclude Ovid and fake leather my turn-include Ovid and fake leather my turn-offs have all been ushered into the base-offs have all been ushered into the base- ment I ll drink to them and to any victorythe vines are all growing toward the footthe vines are all growing toward the footof my bed I am waiting for them to comeof my bed I am waiting for them to come under the covers I am the only person still inthis house there is no one here to look awaythis house there is no one here to look away

the day after you sighed               your last breath out we let your butterflies go your painted ladies four of them born               from paper wombs               into a cheesecloth cage now proudly decked out               in orange and white               trimmed in black we let them go               with stiffened fingers they would not leave one drifted in hovering               half-hearted circles another rested softly on your               daughter's wet shoulder a third held close to the budding               milkweed you saved               from the scythe years ago the last one content to say               perched in its velvet cape               on my sunlit finger we could not speak so still               the afternoon and when time began               once again to flow they knew it was for them               (the opening of our hands) another ragged breath was drawn as they pumped and sputtered               (a single voice) and took to the clouding sky

If Black History Month is not viable then wind does not carry the seeds and drop them on fertile ground rain does not dampen the land and encourage the seeds to root sun does not warm the earth and kiss the seedlings and tell them plain: You re As Good As Anybody Else You ve Got A Place Here, Too

For this you may see no need, You may think my aim Dead set on something Devoid of conceivable value: An Anthology of  Rain, A collection of voices Telling someone somewhere What it means to follow a drop Traveling to its final place of rest. But do consider this request If you have pressed your nose Of any shape against a window, Odor of metal faint, persistent, While a storm cast its cloak Over the shoulder of every cloud In sight. You are free to say Whatever crosses your mind When you look at the face of time In the passing of one drop Gathering speed, one drop Chasing another, racing to reach A fork in the path, lingering Before making a detour to join Another, fattening on the way Until entering a rivulet Running to the sill. So please accept this invitation: You are welcome to submit, There is no limit to its limit, Even the instructions are a breeze As long as you include Nothing about yourself Except your name. Your address Remains unnecessary, for the rain Will find you   if you receive it It receives you (whether or not You contribute, a volume Is sent). And when you lift The collection you may hear, By opening anywhere, a drop And its story reappear As air turns to water, water to air.

They weighed the human soul   twenty-one grams   a tremor on the air becoming trance, becoming nimbus. No. It is a deadweight, a plummet, drawing down to its harbor beside the heart. It is Breath and Word, they said. No. It is pig-iron and salt. The dying feel its slow lift as riddance, a bar of darkness hoisting against the light.Something shifted under his skin, it puckered, as might a wormSomething shifted under his skin, it puckered, as might a worm going slither-and-tuck close to the nape of his neck, then up past the cheekbone and onto the sill of his eye to gorge on the image trapped there, the last of her, the last lost thing before the sky grew dark and all the windows closed. The dead are given permission to walk among us. They smile dead smiles, they have no need for speech. The familiar goes for nothing. Each evening they hold up to our windows their silent, smiling children. Salt flats of dream of memory of dream ... limitless horizons and out on the utmost rim (can you see?) a house white-on-white abstract except for the room-within-a-room which can t be seen but can be known, white being one thing in sunlight another under moonlight, not oblivion, not revival, and the soul s song across that windless landscape, unheard; by night the heart-stopped silence, by day the rising glare. Graves under bramble and a wet light through the trees. A quietness something like stealth or sudden absence; it seemed to gather and disperse. Rat-run, ground for stray dogs, a place where lovers come to be swallowed whole by half-light. You could lie down here on thorn, on stone, and find your match. Wind-driven salt in the crevice of the rock is how memory works: image, invention, regret. It maddens with its ersatz colors, unknowable language, sudden reversals, shoreline, skyline, cityscape, landscape ... There are those who wake with the whole thing fixed at the forefront of their minds: a stage-set, people held in a frozen moment who will break to action soon, one fearful, one laughing, one clawing at her eyes. He was wearing a dead man s coat: knee-length, snug, the lining rich shot silk in midnight blue.  As I thought,  she said,  a perfect fit. Of course, you look nothing like him, nor do you have that rangy, loose-limbed stride or straightness of back.  One side-pocket was sewn up, in the other, a letter. He threw it away as he left. Music at every turn, music by accident, a voice between the phrases, between the notes, calling, calling, and this not song but touchstone, blind bargain, last chance. Dust-devil, derecho, twister, cyclone, clean sweep, she is locked-off in this and the place is dark the way a pebble is dark at its center ... then her prophecy-in-song, eyes wide open in sleep, his hand across her mouth. What they did to him was unwatchable; what they did lay far beyond belief   daytime terrors, waking dreamtime, the lock-up, breeze-block walls, chain-drag, the Black & Decker kicking in: winged creatures, they sing as they work. Dust and shadow, come back to that, come back with a heavy heart. Is there nothing more: is that what you heard yourself say? Children in the garden, the headlong rush, the wolf pack between trees and snowfall under moonlight: the story you told is the story you were told: snow and a frost-moon, as clear, as pitiless. He untangled the thing that had snagged in her hair, his hand through a spectrum, spectral, blurring, a rail of fingers, to lift the thing in her hair. It would rain that day: cloud low to the hills, morning as nightfall, her window open to that. Slow sacrament of cheese and olive oil and bread, the creep of sundown-sunlight on the wall.  How safe do you feel at times like this?  Laughing, he bared his teeth. A thing flew in at the open window, bird or bat.  It s like looking at clear water through clouded glass.  They were far off from anywhere. A salted seam, just fool s gold, leavings of a dream wherein you give a true report of who you were, of what you could become. In rainfall you re invisible, in sunlight the same, that s all the dream gives up: a sense of place and sudden banishment.

I just don't think that this is what it's supposed to feel like, shaking my big one to break the stream and make a pool for moving my tools, for they only weigh half as much when moved under water. I emerged in the morning, covered in blood and fine acid sand and decided to remain partially submerged a little while longer. Itching for more exercise, and cooled not by water but by air, I spent the afternoon collecting sea shells, and found each one heavily carved with the numbers of pretty village girls offering to take tourists to the ultimate level. A spring and summer service they offer. I meant to call one, with a headline ready on my lips, but a gull would dive down wheeling and screaming each time I tried to dial. One can fool the animals, but must forgive this wild, beautiful country.



All the trees kept their own counsel without any wind to speak of, until one lone limber pine began gesticulating wildly, as if it suffered from its own inner cyclone.                                                                   It was like a lunatic in the courtroom of other trees.                                               We forgot about the sunset and the dark coming on across the plain.                                                    Then the reason appeared: a mother antelope had twin newborns backed into the tree and fended off a pair of coyotes who darted in and feinted out, knowing she couldn't defend them both.                                                   The girl I was with shrieked, "Do something!"                          I thought of the rifle back at the house.                                                                                                 I thought of a litter of coyote whelps in a den somewhere nearby.                                                                                                 I thought of the three-hundred-yard sprint to the tree.                                                                      The mother antelope would be first to bolt, and those coyotes would have the aplomb to make off with both twins.                                     I said no.                                                      The antelope struck out with her forelegs, she butted the coyotes back, until one of them got the chance they had orchestrated and caught a twin and trotted off, dangling it by the nape as gently as if it were her own.

The poppies start as aliens end as husbands, a pause of light, a dull scatter. Transports dandelion clouds. Venus passes between sun & earth. Exceedingly rare, Transit, have you noticed how close the ode & elegy are? (In the United States someone dies every sixteen seconds!) Husband, Supermoon, Venus come & go. Death says there is no you at the end of weather. "Among the rarest of all predictable astronomical . . ." Husband presented me. The weatherman says we are locked in the clouds.

You're presenting me with a telescopic line of reasoning. You think because one dies then to die must be a good idea. Let me get this straight. So you think to follow suit is what's In the cards and the works and the stars. It may be that's The next step that's clear or it may be there's another way. You may find a friend for whom to die is not the be-all Or the end. There were ten rooms and a thousand shelves And ten thousand bottles filled with ten million tickets. You Were on the end of the ladder in a blue sky filled with litter. It was tantamount to a ticker tape parade on the streets of A stunned city. Staccato ropes couldn't hold you any longer. And in the evening's sudden stillness I breathed in your ear. From now on out everything gets said in a whisper. If you like If you want if you care to come closer. This way is better.  

Dear Sister,   America.   Late nights, we lie under the spread and listen to the stereo jazz sounds of WTKO on the FM station. He says I am so fine in my tight, pulled-back and strapless bed-sheet gown. Imagine, the polyester with sequins. A sultry Dinah Washington.  Turn.     He puts a pillow on his stomach,Turn.      a finger to his lips and blows   he can do a Louis like nobody else.Turn,     to the Golden Oldies.Turn,      Sometimes, he calls me his favorite Supreme or his one and only Apollo showgirl.   With the switch of a dial, we move in unison. In the infinite dark, our flickering stations    turn.turn.  

I quit med school when I found out the stiff they gave me had book 9 of Paradise Lost and the lyricsParadise Lost  to  Louie Louie  tattooed on her thighs.   That morning as the wind was mowing little ladies on a street below, I touched a Bunsen burner to the Girl Scout sash whose badges were the measure of my worth:  Careers . . . Careers . . . Cookery, Seamstress . . .Cookery, Seamstress . . . and Baby Maker. . . all gone up in smoke.Baby Maker. . .    But I kept the merit badge marked Dangerous Life,Dangerous Life, for which, if you remember, the girls were taken to the woods and taught the mechanics of fire,   around which they had us dance with pointed sticks lashed into crucifixes that we d wrapped with yarn and wore on lanyards round our necks, calling them our  Eyes of God.    Now my mother calls the pay phone outside my walk-up, raving about what people think of a woman thirty, unsettled, living on food stamps, coin-op Laundromats & public clinics.   Some nights I take my lanyards from their shoebox, practice baying those old camp songs to the moon. And remember how they told us that a smart girl could find her way out of anywhere, alive.  

It is snowing in southwest Michigan. Such weather is unusual so late. The trees are squirting buds that advocate For green profusions that yesterday began To grunt and poke and strain toward full-blown spring. Now fleeced, the trees are January stark. Though clocks, sprung forward, hedge against the dark, We hear the arias our miseries sing When darkness is a slave to all that white. If global warming is the fangs of doom I see its poison wafting, from this room. The future will be mottled if not bright. Perhaps I ll die before the killing trend. I hear my children s voices on this wind.  

I realize there is simply no way to stay up in the air with a sustained flapping motion. Sucks! But that doesn't mean I can't try. How odd to eat only white bread for levity. In spite of its limitations, you must consider the possibilities of leaping, daily. Whatever monster ails you, leap into the cool wind. I hope you consider me an authority. You don't know what this means. Yet. I have the necessary education for this type of work. I will imitate the sound of your father laughing into a microphone through a public address system in your place of work. How did that idea get into these instructions? I'm going to put stickers on the back of your shirt that will instruct people how to behave around you. Then, I'll leap through the air above you when you exit the subway. I just wanted to give you these instructions in a nutshell.

"I see you," she says  one of the flickering homeless with gray alehouse hair, pale blue   eyes, crunchy lips a methadone- troubled moth by the YMCA but who does she see? is it   the chubby, right-handed schoolboy sent out by the nuns at St. Joseph's to clap   the chalkboard erasers clean? Or the giddy teenage shipping clerk at lunch break   smoking pot for the first time behind a curtain factory shed? Perhaps the middle-aged   mortgagee? Maybe an ex- proofreader in lawyerland or betraying husband? Maybe the good loser? How about   the new father smiling in tears? Why not the complainer's   ally, or the devoted wanker, or the inert doubter, or the annoyancer   or toddler?  if not the circumspect bald man, crank, or   unselfish lecturer  or does she see each of them?  maybe each   would like a lantern to carry; tho there are   nowhere near enough lamps for all.



Just tell me who the hell am I? What powers did I, do I hold? What right have I to say  my  or  mine  or  me    all honey- glazed, all bullet-proofed and worshipful of any gangster  I ? The key to the Dollar Store hangs on my belt. Yes,  my  again. And what of roof, of bread, of loving laughter? What s in? My vinyl favorite Booker Little, vintage, soothes me. He jars our ears with trumpet joy and stuff freed folks stash in cabinets. Never one to make too much of why we love and what, I love my powers. I might put you in my will.

I bring you a hummingbird s nest, woven from seed-down, thistle head, bound with lichen and spidersilk, shaped by a mother who presses her breast against the cup, uses her rump, chin, the curve of her wing, who stomps her claws on the base to check it s windproof under this leaf porch. The male gone, she works alone, hurrying back and forth thirty times an hour, before the eggs come. She lays them in a home small as a nutshell, the rim turned in, the sides pliant so they ll stretch as the chicks grow. Little mother, I ve read your file filled with letters to the mairie, begging for a place where we could live together. I know now how hard you fought the powers, like a jeweled dart stabbing at their door, before you fell prey to the jungle mantis. Instead of flowers, I leave you this nest on your grave, in case you make it from your migration   only a wisp of feathers, no flesh left on your bones.

Bouteloua blackgrama grass redgrama grass red chino side- oats blue grama grasshairy buffalo-hairy buffalo-grass toboso three-awngrass toboso three-awn land s dawn   sun over sand, tumble wind-mill witch- cup- saltgrassmill witch- cup- saltgrass plains love- indiangrass, prairie cordgrass, pink pappusgrass, sprangle-top green knotroottop green knotrootbristle, bluestem, tangle-bristle, bluestem, tangle- head, sacaton paniclesopen, golden drop-open, golden drop- seed blooms desert winter-grass, awns twist, un-grass, awns twist, un- twist, suchsuchsyllables flickersyllables flickerout of grassout of grassout of grass: Naniss anah: Naniss anah thirst, ghost dancenativenative spirits, active roots, footstalks to soil as to site, stemsbend, range-bend, range-lands wave, seichelands wave, seiche fields sway, clouds pass over-grazed grassgrazed grass staked, fenceddries, weakens, dies,dries, weakens, dies, fallencrowns, the grasslandscrowns, the grasslands whatcomes to pass, ranch-comes to pass, ranch- hand lands, live-stock livelihoodstock livelihood wildlife gone, displaced, migrations impeded, scales im- balancedthe yearsthe yearsspread, each itselfspread, each itselfitselfhitched to everything elsehitched to everything elsein the universein the universenodesnodeshollowed, drought-hollowed, drought- land years, dropson the hardpanon the hardpannaturenature is endlessregenerationregeneration trichloris, muhly, switch- grass, wind misses    shasha through the pass-    shasha through the pass-shasha es, whispering seedswill pass, will passwill pass, will passwill pass, will passwithin leaveswithin leaves listeninggrasses, not onlygrasses, not onlynot onlythe revelationthe revelation but the nature behindto sustain it, over-to sustain it, over-to sustain it land grasses seeds spread and grow, rhizome, stolon to sod, curlymesquite cotton-mesquite cotton-top, drafttop, draft to draft   ten thousandgrasses,   dancinggrasses,   dancing culms   of grass florescence, sheaths and blades whorl flower toflower, wildflower, wildgrass, knowinggrass, knowingwind strips, slipswind strips of time, the leaves words weave, un-weave theweave the grass

In the branches of the laurel tree I saw two dark doves One was the sun and one the moon Little neighbors I said where is my grave    In my tail said the sun On my throat said the moon And I who was walking with the land around my waist saw two snow eagles and a naked girl One was the other and the girl was none Little eagles I said where is my grave   In my tail said the sun On my throat said the moon In the branches of the laurel tree I saw two naked doves One was the other and both were none    Translated from the SpanishTranslated from the SpanishTranslated from the Spanish

fluid melodic getting more and more drastic   the moment she gives in to him she regrets it   a throat   a chest   trying to press themselves         a current of air air through the mask   all the flourishes in the world   the fingers, the foot trilling, the breath keen   responding to recitative closing and opening   out from the head with the hands   carry it through the aria carry it through the chorus   when finally does, waltzes a solo but not alone        let's waltz a rumba"   never gives in to the waltz never embellished   motifs, mimetic, sign language as clear gesture   displacing singers he likes this sound   muted and pronounced   effort of error she likes this sound weight, irrepressible   effort of eros         they talk about their differences w/out trying to change or be changed   regretting herself   where do we meet each other   w/out trying to hang or be caged

The television in The Deer Hunter is in Clairton, Pennsylvania. Everything is still atThe Deer Hunter  Welsh s Lounge: the clouds, the sky, the unlit neon sign outside the window. All is calm, all is bright. I sing in English while my father is in Vietnam. American wives are in immeasurable pain and so is my mother. American soldiers are pushing a hel- icopter to the right side of the TV screen. Behind the soldiers is number 19. It stands for USS Hancock: its nickname, Fighting Hannah. Helicopter whirring. It sounds like Godzilla crying. My father is nowhere to be seen because he s behind the camera, behind the lens. His eye s filled with the green ocean. It zooms in on the soldiers, some in uniform, some shirtless, on the decks with number 19 behind them. They re calm and bright, looking down at the flight platform below. Nobody is crying. Num- ber 19 goes beyond Yi Sang s number 13. History is hysterical. The-13th-child-also- says-it s-terrifying. 13+3+3. 19=13. A modest, shared hallucination. I m still the 13th child. And Godzilla is still crying. Hannah ditches the helicopter in the sea. Now everything is happening on the left side of the screen. Nobody s in the cockpit of the helicopter. The chopper blades tilt, making a diagonal line across the entire screen. That strange cry. It wants to go home O like me, like my father. Now the helicopter and its blades are perfectly vertical to the South China Sea. The chopper is now engulfed by the sea, white with foam. Sayonara, Saigon! THIS SEEMS TO BE THE LAST CHAPTER IN THE HISTORY OF AMERICAN INVOLVEMENT IN VIET- NAM. Now everything appears in the center of the screen. Helicopter is everything. Hannah is everything. My father s framing never sways even when flowers call to him. He edits as he films, he often told me. He s still nowhere to be seen. Missing in action somewhere in Cambodia, filming carpet bombing, my mother said. O the chopper s belly convulses. O it s in immeasurable pain. The chopper s door open and the pilot and men in white shirts and dark pants spill out. IT S ALSO BEEN THE LARGEST SINGLE MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE IN THE HISTORY OF AMERICA IT- SELF. The chopper s blades are swirling in every frenzied direction. O suicidal lines. Sayonara, Saigon! HILARY BROWN, ABC NEWS ABOARD THE ATTACK AIRCRAFT CARRIER USS HANCOCK IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA. White with foam. Now I see buttons on History's blouse.

Where can the dead hope to stash some part of themselves, if not in the living? And so when I had a daughter, I gave her your name. She does not use it. She goes by a silly, other thing she was called once in fun, and then often enough that it stuck. But oh her hideous pill- eyed toys   to them each, she has given her given name, and so it is you I hear her again and again calling to. It is your name she shrieks to the bale-head farmer, the woven goat, the cop made of buttons and rags. Your name, to the squat gray dog on wheels, tipping on its side as she drags it by a red string. That dog, always prone and pulled along, as though constantly being killed and paraded through town to make an example. What did it do    Whatever it did, don t do it.

The phone call, from my wife.She s hungry, she s pregnant,She s hungry, she s pregnant,someone kicked hersomeone kicked her  in the stomach we have to. in the stomach we have to.  I say yes, but the reply I keep to myself is,   We don t have to do a goddamn thing. We don t have to do a goddamn thing. A dog. I m talking about a dog I would have otherwise left to starve.   Now though, five years since, I love this animal, Lucy, more than I can most people.                       A boy names his dog and five cats after our Lucy. The boy, my brother, born in Henry Ford s hometown,   lives now in Lebanon, which the Greeks called Phoenicia, and they tried but failed   to subdue it, same as the Egyptians, Hittites, Assyrians, Babylonians, Alexander the Great, Romans, Arabs,   Crusaders, Turks, the British, the French, the Israelis. There, my father built a house   with money earned in Detroit  as a grocer, with social security. Also there, the first alphabet   was created, the first law school built, the first miracle of Jesus  water, wine.                       On the first day the bombs fall they flee and the boy asks   to go back for Lucy, the dog. As for the cats,No. They take care of themselves.No. They take care of themselves.   One week into it he wonders who feeds them, who fills the water bowls.  Maybe the neighbors,Maybe the neighbors, the mother thinks out loud. The father is indignant: Neighbors Neighbors  what neighbors? They re gone.what neighbors? They re gone. The mother is stunned:What do you mean, gone? What do you mean, gone?    After a month, everyone forgets or just stops talking about the animals. During the ceasefire   my father drives south, a thirty-minute trip that lasts six hours wreckage upon wreckage   piled on the roads, on what is left of the roads. The landscape entirely gray, so catastrophic   he asks a passerby how far to his town and is told,You re in it.You re in it.                         My father finds three of the cats, all perforated, one headless. The dog is near the carport,   where it hid during lightning storms, its torso splayed in half like meat on a slab, its entrails   eaten by other dogs scavenging on the streets. Look. They re animals.   Which is to say, there are also people. And I haven t even begun telling you what was done to them.  

1 Our last night in the house was not our last.With two cats in the yard. Our movers tookWith two cats in the yard the furniture in the morning. A country whereA country where they turned back time. Lifting a trunk, Dad felt something slip in his back. I have becomeI have become comfortably numb. No driving with such pain.The day destroys the night. Our real last night,The day destroys the night footsteps on hardwood floors. People and friendsPeople and friends I still can recall. Sean with his singles player.Dream until your dream comes true. Dan,Dream until your dream comes true an even match across the ping-pong table.They're the faces of the stranger. A girlfriendThey're the faces of the stranger kissed in the sunroom. She can take the darkShe can take the dark out of the nighttime. Too shy or young for more.I'm already standing on the ground.I'm already standing on the ground Training for cross country with the other, better runners. Get up, get up, get outGet up, get up, get out of the door. A twenty-mile summer thunderstorm. Into this world we're thrown.Into this world we're thrown The melancholy of second place. I've paidI've paid my dues, time after time. The dream the Red Sox might someday win it all. When I was young,When I was young, it seemed that life was so wonderful. 2 Leaving the morning with Dad in the back.The danger on the rocks is surely past.The danger on the rocks is surely past. Big sisters with licenses. Baby you can driveBaby you can drive my car. One last trip West. Running intoRunning into the sun. Not down through the desert to Christmas on a San Diego beach. All the leavesAll the leaves are brown. Not down from the Rockies to speed across Nevada. Like endless rain intoLike endless rain into a paper cup. No stop in Medicine Bow, highway hung on a ridge. Mountains comeMountains come out of the sky. No hummingbirds surrounding my uncle's Colorado cabin. ComeCome with me or go alone. Instead we went to North Dakota, then up to Winnipeg to visit cousins. Leave us helpless, helpless,Leave us helpless, helpless, helpless. The even more endless highways of Canada. Get your kicks. In Glacier,Get your kicks footsteps without sound, each breath clouding another constellation. Open up Open up your mind and float downstream. Front-row seats for the Red Sox in Seattle. SweetSweet little sixteen. A foul ball that Dad leapt up to grab. Joltin' Joe has leftJoltin' Joe has left and gone away. Going on to Palo Alto.Be sure to wear some flowers in your hair.Be sure to wear some flowers in your hair Arriving on Labor Day, Grace Slick's concert spilling into the new backyard. One pillOne pill makes you larger, and one pill makes you small. Our first night in the house, and not our last.Johnny come lately, there's a new kid in town.Johnny come lately, there's a new kid in town.

 Tall, strong, beautiful, with the shoulders of Hermes of Praxiteles, that is how my wife first fashioned me, I who proved our Milky Way but another galaxy   among the Nebelflecken fleeing breakneck with the restNebelflecken  by the law, the constant, the time that bear my name: Hubble, stamped with Newton, Copernicus, Galileo.   Not bad for an Ozark farm boy hodded off to Oxford on a Rhodes, who tailored himself to tweeds and speaks the King s English, as though he d suckled on shires.   Astronomy, I attest, is a history of receding horizons, though mine tend to open to dinners with Stravinsky, the Fairbanks, and coup de ma tre, my surprise star-turncoup de ma tre,    at the Oscars: spotlights, applause, the whole heavens blue-shifted to me. Still nothing headier than nights on Mt. Wilson, eye at the lens, my briar pipe glowing,   Humason at the spectrascope tracing the light shifts who was my mule driver. His habits straight poker, panther juice try the soul, but he s brilliant at the shot.   Odd, too, the little priest who came to visit years ago, that he should account for nebulas  radial velocities two years before me, though I only trust the data    how he looked calmly pleased at Einstein s recantation:The most beautiful solution to creation I have ever heard.The most beautiful solution to creation I have ever heard. So clocks reel back with space camera, action, light. 

  

bear with me      it wasn t long ago I was brainless lazily pulling fireflies into my teeth       chewing them into pure light       so much of me then was nothing I could have fit into a sugar cube      my body burned like a barnful of feathers        nothing was on fire but fire was on everything       the wild mustard the rotting porch chair         a box of birth records        eventually even scorched earth goes green       though beneath it the dead might still luxuriate in their rage     my ancestor was a dervish saint     said to control a thick river of dark milk under his town        his people believed he could have spared them a drought       they ripped him to pieces like eagles tearing apart a snake    immediately they were filled with remorse       instead of burying him        they buried a bag of goat bones and azalea      my hair still carries that scent my eyes      black milk and a snake s flicking tongue does this confuse you       there are so many ways to be deceived a butcher s thumb pressed into the scale       a strange blue dress in a bathtub    the slowly lengthening night      I apologize I never aimed at eloquence      I told my mother I wouldn t live through the year       then waited for a disaster      sitting cheerfully on cinder blocks pulled from a drained pond      tossing peanuts to squirrels     this is not the story she tells     hers filled with happy myths       fizzy pistons and plummy ghosts it s true I suppose       you grow to love the creatures you create some of them come out with pupils swirling       others with teeth

It s not hard to imagine: my ancestor a dry season,                dust like chalk on her tongue mixes                               spit with clay,   traces a river on rock. Next day: rain.                                                                              Why shouldn t she believe                in the power of rock and her own hand?   I carry this need for pattern and rule, to see connections                where there aren t necessarily any.                                                               After my first miscarriage, I cut out soda, cold cuts.                  After the second, vacuuming and air travel.   After the third it s chalk and spit again. I circle rocks,                swim the icy river.                                                And when my son is born, he balances the chemical equation that is this world.                                                                                             And logic?   Logic is my son s kite, good so long as you have                wind, string,                                              something heavier than hope                                                                                             to tether you.  

The sun changed colors The moon enamored even the most elderly, The tomatoes blushed with joy upon seeing you pass by.

If you think you know enough to say this poem is about good hair, I'll correct you and tell you it's about history which is the blacksmith of our tongues. Our eyes. Where you see misunderstanding I see knuckles and teeth for sale in a storefront window. I see the waterlogged face of the fourteen-year-old boy. The bullet's imperceptible sizzle toward an unarmed man. And as you ask me to sign the book that is not mine, your gaze shifting between me and the author's photo, whispering,but that's not you? I do notbut that's not you?  feel sorry for you. No. I think only that when a man is a concept he will tell you about the smell of smoke. He will tell you the distance between heartbreak and rage.

I forgot forget amnesia was lost to me then a smooth fur-free fruit unnamed for days until I found it ripe on my tongue

Did a slave song at a master s bidding mark Tom while asleep in Charity's womb? The whole plantation would be called to sing and dance in Master Epps  large parlor room  after work sprung from dawn and dragged past dusk, after children auctioned to parts unknown, after funerals and whippings. Thus was the whim of the patriarch. No groans allowed, just high steppin  celebration, grins all around, gritted or sincere. Charity threw feet, hips, arms into motion to please the tyrant piano. Was it here Tom learned how music can prove the master? While he spun in a womb of slavish laughter?

I m queer for nouns or verbs that end in -ickle,ickle For bouncy trampolines, for trust and bluff. We re told by those downtown that La Morbid s dull Renouncing didn t rustle up enough Bling to dazzle more than a few of them. Turn on a dime, a channel. Those we flip Ring truer than the frilly stratagem Fern bars used to unfurl, and we know zip About karate or brass knucks. To battle The meltdown blues, lay out your Cups and Swords. Don t doubt the Duke will hop down from the saddle, His belt slung low. Check out the storyboards: Next year he trades his roan for a motorcycle.

First time out I was a torc of gold And wept tears of the sun.   That was fun But they buried me In the earth two thousand years   Till a labourer Turned me up with a pick In eighteen fifty-four.   Once I was an oar But stuck in the shore To mark the place of a grave   When the lost ship Sailed away. I thought Of Ithaca, but soon decayed.   The time that I liked Best was when I was a bump of clay   In a Navaho rug, Put there to mitigate The too god-like   Perfection of that Merely human artifact. I served my maker well     He lived long To be struck down in Denver by an electric shock   The night the lights Went out in Europe Never to shine again.   So many lives, So many things to remember! I was a stone in Tibet,   A tongue of bark At the heart of Africa Growing darker and darker . . .    It all seems A little unreal now, Now that I am   An anthropologist With my own Credit card, dictaphone,   Army-surplus boots And a whole boatload Of photographic equipment.   I know too much To be anything any more; And if in the distant   Future someone Thinks he has once been me As I am today,   Let him revise His insolent ontology Or teach himself to pray.  

And earnest to explore within around   The divine wood, whose thick green living woof  Tempered the young day to the sight I wound  Up the green slope, beneath the forest s roof,  With slow, soft steps leaving the mountain s steep,  And sought those inmost labyrinths, motion-proof  Against the air, that in that stillness deep  And solemn, struck upon my forehead bare,  The slow, soft stroke of a continuous ...  In which the ... leaves tremblingly were  All bent towards that part where earliest  The sacred hill obscures the morning air.  Yet were they not so shaken from the rest,  But that the birds, perched on the utmost spray,  Incessantly renewing their blithe quest,  With perfect joy received the early day,  Singing within the glancing leaves, whose sound  Kept a low burden to their roundelay,  Such as from bough to bough gathers around  The pine forest on bleak Chiassi s shore,  When Aeolus Sirocco has unbound.  My slow steps had already borne me o er  Such space within the antique wood, that I  Perceived not where I entered any more,   When, lo! a stream whose little waves went by,  Bending towards the left through grass that grew  Upon its bank, impeded suddenly  My going on. Water of purest hue  On earth, would appear turbid and impure  Compared with this, whose unconcealing dew,  Dark, dark, yet clear, moved under the obscure  Eternal shades, whose interwoven looms  The rays of moon or sunlight ne er endure.  I moved not with my feet, but mid the glooms  Pierced with my charmed eye, contemplating  The mighty multitude of fresh May blooms  Which starred that night, when, even as a thing  That suddenly, for blank astonishment,  Charms every sense, and makes all thought take wing,   A solitary woman! and she went  Singing and gathering flower after flower,  With which her way was painted and besprent.  Bright lady, who, if looks had ever power  To bear true witness of the heart within,  Dost bask under the beams of love, come lower  Towards this bank. I prithee let me win  This much of thee, to come, that I may hear  Thy song: like Proserpine, in Enna s glen,  Thou seemest to my fancy, singing here  And gathering flowers, as that fair maiden when  She lost the Spring, and Ceres her more dear.

When I wake, this is what I tell myself:           I belong to this, to all the ghosts present   in the DNA. Diabetes,           an ancient Greek consort, sweeps through the halls   of my body. It seems the proper gift           from my father, memory locked down in the cells   of my bladder. Frequent urination           is a hard nag to beat. My body   is my father's complaint. He rings at two           in the morning. A piss in the pot, a shot   in the dark. He's never too far away.  

Dropping napkins, corks, and non-compostables into the trash, I see that friends have mistaken my everyday chopsticks for disposables, helpfully discarding them alongside inedibles: pork bones, shrimp shells, bitter melon. Among napkins and corks, they do look compostable: off-white, wooden, warped from continual washing   no lacquer, no ornament. But anyone who thinks these chopsticks are disposable doesn t live with chopsticks in the comfortable way of a favorite robe, oversized, a bit broken. Thin paper napkins, plastic forks, and non-compostable takeout boxes constitute the chopstick s natural habitat to many I hold dear. With family or alone, I ll maintain that chopsticks aren t disposable, but if I can make peace with the loss of utensils when breaking bao with guests, I ll be one of them,bao not digging in the napkins and corks. Compostable chopsticks are the answer: everyday and disposable.and

Can you imagine waking up every morning on a different planet, each with its own gravity? Slogging, wobbling, wavering. Atilt and out-of-sync with all that moves and doesn t. Through years of trial and mostly error did I study this unsteady way    changing pills, adjusting the dosage, never settling. A long time we were separate, O Earth, but now you have returned to me.

In that old story, the boy is depicted as delicate, lithe, and beautiful. Ovid had it wrong. Yes, the boy was beautiful, beautiful enough to capture a god s attention, but he was not delicate. He was anything but delicate,   his muscles toned from working the fields. Listen to me; the gods are fairly conventional. A lovely woman is transformed into an old hag, a too-slow voyeur becomes the quick stag to be chased and shot through   by a single arrow. So, in the case of this young man, he must have been strong, anything but delicate like these flowers. The gods are convincing when they need to be. Believe me, they are honey-mouthed and persistent. The boy   had to be strong, but he was not stronger than the gods. He was seduced; who isn t seduced by immortality? In the field, the boy was every bit the archer as the god. He was just as powerful with a spear, a slingshot, or a discus.   Ovid writes that Apollo loved the boy, loved him more than any living thing on this earth. But we know better. The gods love only themselves. In the field, a clearing ringed by trees, the boy did not   try to catch the discus. He was running from it, running from the god who took pains to aim so as to slice him clean through with a single shot. You see, this is not love. A god commanding spilled blood become delicate blue flowers is not love.  

Two bedtimes ago, through my window, I heard a cat get eaten. As the cat split, it sounded like a balloon string put to scissors to make curls so the birthday boy would smile extra wide. Last night, by the same window, I heard mostly my breath, inside of which was a small baby suckling my air for his milk. When I bolted upright, the baby grew up into a carpenter, nailing his brains into the side of my lung to babyproof the light switch. Flip the switch and it lights a picture of my emaciated, sore-ridden bum for my breath to laugh at. Why is my breath so unlike yours? My ears? Why do I only hear such unnatural things? Although, come to think of it, death is completely natural. I m just exasperated. Everywhere life-soundslifesounds swarm this, our shared pond, like mating turtles. Cars whoosh, schmoozers hum, snakes spit poison, Martin and Martina say yesyes and sob and hold, but my ears fill up instead with eggshells cracked by the bumbling parents. I cleaned my left ear out, but my nail cut the drum. It filled with water and is deaf for now. I m leaving the right one dirty. No sudden changes. Keep everything dry. Let it figure out a way to heal itself. And me:  just practice living with yourself  deaf. Sometimes your brain is as unwelcome as muscles or guns. It s obvious to others. Maybe even everyone. Don t wish for anything. Don t get organized. Don t buy a book. Don t go to bed early. Seek out beige, in foodstuffs and landscapes. Chew gum if  you re overwhelmed. You re in this alone. That means there s nobody to stop you. You re almost at the finish line. But first, you have to pick a finish line.

You were given feet but had never touched them to earth. You were given the sea and you fed upon it for months.   So when your head crowned, ashen with loss of blood from the cord wound tight around your neck,   and when they cut you from me, and you were silent, and the tide in me receded, I remembered the shearwaters   following the ship the slow sweep of them riding the wind s current. The stretch of them, hovering,   cruciform, shearing the air the way an envelope slides back into a box of letters, making its narrow space. I had watched   from the stern for hours their trailing: as if stillness itself drifted toward me. I thought it was my life.   Then someone lifted you up, and there was a sound, and they laid you on me, breathing.  

 Not to Be Despised  PillowWordWordFunnyGoodnight Guilty PleasuresDatelineDateline Questionable Gestures  Incongruous in Better By MoonlightMoonlight Sonata

I will hear his sleep in and through my own, my sleep will be bathed in his as if we slept in one same fluid My sleep floats within a listening so deep that the separating spaces of air become as pliant and full as snowfall, its singing silence as profound My ears and his throat   the sensation of anticipated hearing close inside the ear and the incipient murmur or cry forming at the end of his sleep   borne like birds and thrumming on the air of rooms between us My own sleep will be his clock, safely keeping time, his sleep tunes my dreams to listen, our sleep binds the hour, heavy and warm, into a blanket of air and sound

         1 Held between wars my lifetime                   among wars, the big hands of the world of death my lifetime listens to yours. The faces of the sufferers in the street, in dailiness, their lives showing through their bodies a look as of music the revolutionary look that says    I am in the world to change the world my lifetime is to love to endure to suffer the music to set its portrait up as a sheet of the world the most moving the most alive Easter and bone and Faust walking among flowers of the world and the child alive within the living woman, music of man, and death holding my lifetime between great hands the hands of enduring life that suffers the gifts and madness of full life, on earth, in          our time, and through my life, through my eyes, through my arms         and hands may give the face of this music in portrait waiting for the unknown person held in the two hands, you.          2 Woman as gates, saying: "The process is after all like music, like the development of a piece of music. The fugues come back and                                                again and again interweave. A theme may seem to have been put aside, but it keeps returning  the same thing modulated, somewhat changed in form. Usually richer. And it is very good that this is so." A woman pouring her opposites. "After all there are happy things in life too. Why do you show only the dark side?" "I could not answer this. But I know  in the beginning my impulse to know the working life                               had little to do with pity or sympathy.                                I simply felt that the life of the workers was beautiful." She said, "I am groping in the dark." She said, "When the door opens, of sensuality, then you will understand it too. The struggle begins. Never again to be free of it, often you will feel it to be your enemy. Sometimes you will almost suffocate, such joy it brings." Saying of her husband: "My wish is to die after Karl. I know no person who can love as he can, with his whole soul. But often too it has made me so terribly happy." She said: "We rowed over to Carrara at dawn, climbed up to the marble quarries and rowed back at night. The drops of water fell like guttering stars from our oars." She said: "As a matter of fact, I believe                 that bisexuality is almost    a necessary factor in artistic production; at any rate, the tinge of masculinity within me helped me                   in my work." She said: "The only technique I can still manage. It's hardly a technique at all, lithography. In it         only the essentials count." A tight-lipped man in a restaurant last night saying to me: "Kollwitz?     She's too black-and-white."          3 Held among wars, watching      all of them      all these people      weavers,      Carmagnole Looking at      all of them      death, the children      patients in waiting-rooms      famine      the street A woman seeing      the violent, inexorable      movement of nakedness      and the confession of No      the confession of great weakness, war,      all streaming to one son killed, Peter;      even the son left living; repeated,      the father, the mother; the grandson      another Peter killed in another war; firestorm;      dark, light, as two hands,      this pole and that pole as the gates. What would happen if one woman told the truth about         her life?      The world would split open          4   Song : The Calling-Up Song : The Calling-Up  Rumor, stir of ripeness rising within this girl sensual blossoming of meaning, its light and form. The birth-cry summoning out of the male, the father from the warm woman a mother in response. The word of death calls up the fight with stone wrestle with grief with time from the material make an art harder than bronze.          5   Self-Portrait    Self-Portrait  Mouth looking directly at you eyes in their inwardness looking directly at you half light    half darkness woman, strong, German, young artist flows into wide sensual mouth meditating looking right at you eyes shadowed with brave hand looking deep at you flows into wounded brave mouth grieving and hooded eyes alive, German, in her first War flows into strength of the worn face a skein of lines broods, flows into mothers among the war graves bent over death facing the father stubborn upon the field flows into the marks of her knowing Nie Wieder KriegNie Wieder Krieg repeated in the eyes flows into "Seedcorn must not be ground" and the grooved cheek lips drawn fine the down-drawn grief face of our age flows intoPieta, mother andPieta between her knees life as her son in death pouring from the sky of one more war flows into face almost obliterated hand over the mouth forever hand over one eye now the other great eye closed

About twilight we came to the whitewashed pub On a knuckle of land above the bay   Where a log was riding and the slow Bird-winged breakers cast up spray.   One of the drinkers round packing cases had The worn face of a kumara god,   Or so it struck me. Later on Lying awake in the veranda bedroom   In great dryness of mind I heard the voice of the sea Reverberating, and thought: As a man   Grows older he does not want beer, bread, or the prancing flesh, But the arms of the eater of life, Hine-nui-te-po,   With teeth of obsidian and hair like kelp Flashing and glimmering at the edge of the horizon.  

It s common to live properly, to pretendyou don t feel heat or grief: wave nightlyyou don t feel heat or grief: wave nightly at Miss Fugue and Mister Goggles before divinginto your nightcap, before reading yourselfinto your nightcap, before reading yourself a bedtime story or watching your beloved sinkto the bottom of a lake and noting his absenceto the bottom of a lake and noting his absence in your log. The next day you drop his clothes offat Goodwill like a sack of mail from a warplaneat Goodwill like a sack of mail from a warplane then hobble back to your hovel like a knight movingonly in Ls. It is comfortable to be alive this way,only in Ls. It is comfortable to be alive this way,L especially now, but it makes you so vulnerable to shock   you ignore the mortgage and find a falconer s gloveyou ignore the mortgage and find a falconer s glove in your yard, whole hand still inside. Or you arrive homeafter a long day to discover your children have grownafter a long day to discover your children have grown suddenly hideous and unlovable. What I m tryingto say is I think it s okay to accelerate aroundto say is I think it s okay to accelerate around corners, to grunt back at the mailman and swallow allyour laundry quarters. So much of everything is dumbyour laundry quarters. So much of everything is dumb baffle: water puts out fire, my diseases can becomeyour diseases, and two hounds will fight over a featheryour diseases, and two hounds will fight over a feather because feathers are strange. All I want is to finallytake off my cowboy hat and show you my jeweledtake off my cowboy hat and show you my jeweled horns. If we slow dance I will ask you not to tugon them but secretly I will want that very much.on them but secretly I will want that very much.

Figured marry for money the stainlessness of it thermostatic shower simulates but isn t rain I simulate rain too. I do lines off a photo of the lunar landing he says is make-believe I don t know the difference most of the things most of the time are as if our Brooklyn Bridge selfies aren t faked to goad our favorite exes as if my diet of carrots and cayenne is  cause nothing tastes as good as skinny makes money makes the bed and stands beside us like a parent with poor boundaries who just wants us to be happy. Mommy s money takes her to Key West where she sends pictures of a cat on king-sized everything says HemingwayHemingway had money, honey! Figured I d money myself into perpetuity as if anything weren t working back to nothing. Figured marry but got thinking now the money keeps itself to itself in Park Slope in a Whole Foods growing greener.

the starsthe starsthe stars The nights midweek are secrets kept. No soul on site, no signal/bars, and zilch for company except a zillion bright disarming stars. I ll flit through ambers, quicker, higher. I ll break each hamlet s stop or yield.stopyield. I ll fix some noodles, start a fire and climb up to the topmost field. The stars at first are sparse, unclear. They surface in that drag between the darkened grass and stratosphere, of powder blue and bottle green. They blossom, thick and fast, in droves. They pulse, in clusters, magnify. The smoke that s my potbelly stove s frays outwards through each needle eye. I ll head below. I ll char till dawn some apple logs down to their core. By pewter light when stars have gone, I ll do a bit, a little more.the rainthe rainthe rain You live inside its sound effects whole weeks on end: its pin machine, its cardboard drum, its soft-boiled eggs, its silent running submarine. It s like the god of liquid rub- ber stirred at dawn to slip downstairs and sip a cigarette, to drub his fingertips on solid layers you poured across last summer s drought. You love it, learn to, as it slows, and even as you come to doubt its dribs and drabs and pigeon toes. Forget the welcome rain outstayed. For days the leaves are parchment sheet and wind hangs chimeless in the shade. Still rain remains the point of heat. The rain is near. Like everything, it s best those seconds just before: the broadleaf  s backwards canvas sling, the fly strip flapping through the door.the windthe windthe wind The wind s this ancient bloke below who chunters  we,  who wheezes  us,  though no one else will come or go. You want to ask the wind  Who s us? us but hold your tongue till, in your head, the wind and him have somehow mixed, the type of wind that loves a shed and banging on of things not fixed: a belt-and-braces year-round wind, a kiln-dried cobwebbed hardwood wind, a greenhouse wind, a treebound wind, an end-of-season car-boot wind, a padlocked shower unit wind, an upturned wheelie dumpster wind, a channel not quite tuned-in wind, a hollow flight-path thunder wind, a dog-eared wind, a knocked-sign wind, a spouseless phantom ocean-blown autumnal graveyard Scots pine wind who speaks in plurals, moves alone.the grassthe grassthe grass One night last June, in cups, in love with pickled gin from bubbly flutes, our clothes in coils about the stove, we climbed the dark in birthday suits. It s true! The grass was mown that day. Like hippies chained in meadow flowers, we tripped above the cut and lay in blades of petrol suede for hours. We listened to the lowing black. We giggled, kissed. We possumed dead. We woke as flesh and straggled back like beasts for parlor, dressed, then read. We trafficked grass in bedspreads, shoes, and never spoke of that again through winter s interregnum blues, of being spooked by skin, of when the only care we had was grass, the only stir for miles around our freezing bones, our clinking glass, our dying to be rumbled, found.

The train moved me, clothes kept me seated. I watched the tunnel walls blur and my face appear, nicer on black plexiglass. The people carried off like I almost was in the old childhood dream, my mother s hand, the tornado in the parking lot. Flooring soda and rain, a humble poser, a composed consumer. Come back to me, I whispered to the purifying wind in a country I d visited years earlier. Come get me, I said to imaginary John Lennon in the passenger seat of my 1984 Volvo. Nothing grows anywhere, I noted in the slick urine grime connecting two underground stations. As for my wallet, it was light in my hand, fictitious, I didn t deserve it    I held it up in the crowded terminal like a magician s pigeon. Or I hid it between my knees on the jerking seat. Nobody wanted to touch me, or nobody who wanted to could reach me here, shaken like a screaming child under wet stairs.

two oblong lobes of rough ice methane and ammonia fallen far below the Kuiper Belt perturbed by Jupiter into nearer perihelion where they warm the coma sublimes the tail blurs a trim probe relays images from the twilit surface as gray and vacant as sleep this small craft a little boat a dim soul in an afterlife in attenuate gravity in stifling quiet in the Tuat to be weighed against the truth Thoth and Anubis at the Scales

She sits there on that high hill    just sits there and lets things pass through her until one snags and she fits it into the pattern of this fine mesh of    what    spirit?    But, ah, there s a cowboy hat and a cherry bomb tattoo and it snags    and what she lets through may,  I say, may be caught second time around like that oil pan off an old Hudson or that artificial leg    toward morning she s collected some radio signals from a dead ship    and a janitor s song and some folderol from a church picnic with iced tea fried chicken collards and a whole lot of stentorian god-speak with apple pie and ice cream.    I ll be damned if all those things aren t moving around in one another s magnetic fields, some kind of counterpoint that happens each time she breathes    it s a mobile only no wires    there s a piece of mirror turning on a spider web and now she s a    signal beacon    says come on up I ve got something to read and somehow it all works. Then she pulls this silk thread and it becomes a form.may

He came home with his right leg made a bit shorter but they didn t notice. A landmine did it, he said to himself, and I was the only one who heard him because I followed him everywhere like a son. He hobbled when no one was looking, and I hobbled behind him. When he plucked an iris, I plucked the one next to it, and we thought of purple evening clouds. When he killed a butterfly, he d take off the wings first, then crush it with his fingers and smell it. I tried to catch one, but it flitted away. He wanted to build a huge power plant to keep us from disappearing. I nodded and pointed out all the recent deaths, how quick they were, tomatoes not as plump as they used to be, the maple trees discolored, their branches like veins with no fat around them. All this, he decided, meant we needed new things. But I disagreed on this: why new, why not old me, I who have lived here for many years even before he was born, but he didn t listen. Mosquitoes come and go, full and happy. Outside the window, the plant looms over the village. It looks prettier than I thought, which makes me want to kiss it, but I know it will burn my lips and I won t be able to speak to anyone with my charred mouth. I saw him dressed up for a meeting, and they shouted, blaming him for his empty head, for wanting too much. The next time I saw him he was in bed, old and delirious. He opened his eyes, and held my hand for the first time, and said, Don t push yourself, come back alive. He was buried in his ever-vanishing land, and I flew off into my friendless life.



I ve tracked myself from day to day how many steps through a field of snow how many hours have I slept what have I eaten what did I burn calories or cigarettes what birds have poured through Bellefontaine where mausoleums bear the names of Busch and Brown Lemp and Spink on marble white as winter endivewhen I can read my title clearwhen I can read my title clear to mansions in the skies what have I read how many words what facts statistics biometrics what data aggregation what news of wins and losses getting and spending each dawn a color wheel to gauge the shifting moods the daylight sunk in trees an index of attraction According to the Tao Te Ching each day brings more and more of less less and still less with no end to nothing and nothing left undone Even here in Bellefontaine along a winding street silence brings an interval of yet more distant sound trucks along the interstate a plane behind the clouds

My observation are as follows: still dirty  in the wisdom  that is constructivist  red theatre pieces, bike gloves all like a mashed crop of dyed hair, a bad crop this year.   We started the play at once:An Enemy of the People.An Enemy of the People. A Buddha of lapidary contrition enters, hospice, tears, La Clemenza di Tito interludeLa Clemenza di Tito    rolled in tulips of decisive consequence.  Sprezzatura. Our rowSprezzatura throws that cosmic scratch, apotropaic, scalene back to the corner pocket angle on the hustle     Live at the Paradox. Live at the Paradox.  

the white of your skin, for skin, except when truly albino, always has some other color sleeping within it a hint of red maple leaf, a touch of the blue ice at the edge of a melting stream, a richness implied of its many layers, the deltas of cells and blood, that deep fecundity that lies within and makes the skin shed, not like a snake, but as a tree (one of those golden cottonwoods flaring just now at the edge of the river) that sheds its leaves each moment while an eternity of leaf remains. Oh, nothing seems to me as white as your skin, all your languid ease of being one resting upon the other, the sliver of your shoulder against the black fabric reminds me so of the lost realm of beauty that I am afraid of nothing, and only dazed (as I was that day at the aquarium when the beluga whales came swimming toward me how white they were, slipping out of the darkness, radiant and buoyant as silence and snow, incandescent as white fire, gliding through the weight of water, and when they sang in that chamber as small as the chambers of the human heart, murky with exhaustion and captivity and the fragments of what they had consumed, I was almost in love with them; they seemed the lost children of the moon, carrying in their milky mammalian skins a hint of glacial ice and singing to each other of all the existences they had left behind, their fins like the wings of birds or angels, clicking and whistling like canaries of the sea: there was no darknessthere was no darknessin their bodies, like clouds drifting throughin their bodies, like clouds drifting throughunkempt skies, they illuminated the room).unkempt skies, they illuminated the room). So I did not think of you so much as I felt you drifting through my being, in some gesture that held me poised like a hummingbird above the scarlet blossoms of the trumpet vine, I kissed you above the heart, and by above I mean there, not that geometric center, the breastbone that so many use to divide the body in half and so mistake for the place where the heart lies, but the exact location, a little to the left, just on the crescent where the breast begins to rise; oh, I know all that drift of white implies, the vanished clothing, the disappearing room, that landscape of the skin and night that opens in imagination and in feeling upon a sea of snow, so that just one kiss above the heart is a kiss upon the heart, as if one could kiss the very pulse of being, light upon the head of that pin that pins us here, that tiny disk where angels were once believed to dance, and all that nakedness without could not have been except for all that burning deep within  

When he got to the farmhouse, he rifled through the cabinets, drawers, and cupboards, and his buddies did too. The place was abandoned, or so he thought, and his buddies did too. He tried to talk to people in town, and his buddies did too, but he was the only one whose Yiddish made it across into German. They took his meaning. He, in the farmhouse, took a camera and a gun, but his buddies, who knows. About the gun, it s also hard to say, but after the war he took up photography, why not, and shot beautiful women for years. Got pretty good at it, and how. Won prizes and engraved plates, put them in a drawer, forgot the war, forgot his buddies, forgot the women, forgot the drawer.

Out along the last curve in the brick walk the grass has begun to green, with the freezing cold and coming snow its certain fate. The cranes make the same mistake, fields of red capped heads attest their arrival just before the worst blizzard of winter makes it impossible to tell the field from the river. And we, too, have known these mortal mishaps, miscalculated our time, found ourselves out of step, arriving too early, staying on too late, misjudging the nearness, the vengeance of the storm. The cranes, the grass, they tell us: this can go on for millions of years.

 I am playing my oldest tunes,  declared she,        All the old tunes I know,  Those I learnt ever so long ago.   Why she should think just then she d play them        Silence cloaks like snow. When I returned from the town at nightfall       Notes continued to pour As when I had left two hours before:  It s the very last time,  she said in closing;         From now I play no more.  A few morns onward found her fading,       And, as her life outflew, I thought of her playing her tunes right through; And I felt she had known of what was coming,       And wondered how she knew.  

 What can or ought the public care about the identity of the portrait?  said James McNeill. Did he look down from neutral heaven on the dealer wearing flannel plaid, adjusting to my denim chair, to make the arrangement, pocket my check in black and smudge and white? The agents said they could easily find it if I had no carbon. FBI with their silk knots and sober suiting just like the famous oil though on different body parts. I could be Mrs. Whistler, but I was the dupe, eyes lowered, the menswear pair noble shadows, tracking down the evil and clever eBay forger (not the original cormorant-tousled Martinez I thought I was purchasing with his true (M) mark from his 19th-century hand). Inspectors with their pointed interrogations   they were way beyond clues    who when they left would form, and be, long shadows at each end of day. Make shapes you might assume would fall from mountain goats in frightening terrain. They reported answers they knew all along. Thigh-high in paintings, I thought to wade out with my honest eyes so little notorious, from mistaken tonalists, expressionists, Society of Six ...     The crook posed in tartan, I fine-tuned to the agents; he talked ordinary   that was my best judgment. So what? He warmed, and got richer in, my denim wingback. I thought of Anna s stern profile; and were they profilers? And as they shook my hand good-bye, I said,Do your wives collect anything?Do your wives collect anything? What do you think? they implied.

Welcome to Texas, Devin Johnston, a windmill has your name  stubborn and American at off-rhyme to the arroyo-creased, angular region. Bald, redheaded turkey buzzards eat a rabbit struck by what it only understood as supernatural. The birds bring to mind black grasshoppers that broke clacking into red-winged and rasping darts. And even as we drive secular sunlight polishes aluminum slantwise.

we had to read the instructions as we sank. In a hand like carded lace. Not nuclear warheadsNot nuclear warheads on the sea's floor nor the violet flow over the reactor will outlive this sorrowful rhyme. Vain halo! My project becalmed, I'll find I've built a monument more passing than a breeze. It will cost us, Pobrecito. We can't buy a prayer. Did you call my name or was that the floorboard wheezing? These memories won't get any bigger, will they? I think something is coming that will vastly improve our quietude. I'm growing snow crystals from vapor in anticipation and praying for the velvet-cushioned kneeler that I need to pray. I made this little sound for you to wait in.  

Chimerical, the rhinoceros egret, its keratin dehorned in South Africa and container-shipped to Vietnam or China where it s ground by aphrodisiasts and snorted by affluent boneheads, metamorphs into the hippopotamus egret, the elephant, Cape buffalo, zebra, giraffe, the ostrich, and the camel egret, the deep-domed tortoise, and in the Americas the cow heron or cattle egret. Ranging like wildfire over the last century, a migration prodded by the transmutation of forests into ranches, the cattle egret writhes and champs and tilts and plods and darts in cursive at grasshoppers. And where its livestock gets concentrated, decapitated, tenderized, charred, whatever, the Bubulcus ibis or cattleman wader,Bubulcus ibis capitalizing on a field without cattle, reinvents itself as the tractor egret though the unattached bird is emblem enough of the other end of extinction, ignition, when not just its shaggy breeding crest and breast plumage go up in flame but its legs, beak, lores, and irises catch color.

what we have is what there is and who we are and who we is is love

An assumption, a pejorative, an honest language,An a an an honorable death. In grade school, I refused to acceptan accept the mayor s handshake; he smiled at everyone exceptexcept people with names like mine. I was born here. I didn t have to adopt America, but I adapted to it.adopt adapted  You understand: a man must be averse to opinionsaverse that have adverse impacts on whether he livesadverse  or dies.  Before taking any advice, know the languageadvice,  of those who seek to advise you.  Certain wordsadvise affected me. Sand nigger, I was called. Camel jockey.affected What was the effect? While I already mutteredeffectalready under my breath, I did so even more. I am notaltogether sure we can all together come. Everythingaltogetherall together was not all right. Everything is not all right.all right. all right. Imagine poetry without allusions to Shakespeare,allusions Greek mythology, the Bible; or allusions withoutallusions the adjectives  fanatical,   extremist,   Islamic,   right,   left,   Christian,   conservative,   liberal.  Language written or translated into a single tongue gives the illusion of tradition. A lot of people murderillusionA lot  language a lot fully aware. Among all the dead,a lot Among  choose between  us  and  them.  Among all the namesbetween Among  for the dead mother, father, brother, sister, husband, wife, child, friend, colleague, neighbor, teacher, student, stranger choose betweenbetween  citizen  and  terrorist.  And poet? Immoral,Immoral, yes, but never amoral? Large amounts, the numberamoralamounts,  between 75 and 90 percent of the estimated 150 million to 1 billion civilians killed during wars, over all of recorded human history. Anxious is  worried Anxious  or  apprehensive.  American poetry, Americans. Young, I learned anyone born here could becomeanyone  President. Older, I can point to any one of a hundredany one  reasons why this is a lie. Anyway, I don t want to beAnyway President, not of a country, or club, not here or there, not anywhere. He said,  I turned the car around because anywhere. because  it began raining bombs.  There s no chance of ambiguity  an as here could mean  because  or  when ; it makesas  no difference he saw the sky, felt the ground, knew what would come next; it matters little when the heart rate in less than a second jumps from 70 to 200 beats per minute. What they did to my grandfather was awful its wretchedness,awful awe-inspiring; its cruelty, terrible; it was awfullyawfully hard to forget. Just after 8:46 AM, I wondered awhileawhile what would happen next. At 9:03 AM, I knew there was going to be trouble for a while to come.while  When in her grief the woman said,  We re going to hurt them bad,  she meant to say,  We re goingbad to hurt them badly.  For seventeen days, duringbadly. air strikes, my grandfather slept on a cot besidebeside a kerosene lamp in the basement of his house. BesidesBesides a few days worth of pills, and a gallon of water, he had nothing else to eat or drink. Given these conditions, none of us were surprised that on the eighteenth day, he died. Besides, he was eighty-two years old.Besides,  I can write what I please. I don t need to ask, May I?May  Like a song: men with capital meet in the Capitolcapital Capitol in the nation s capital. Any disagreements, censored;capital. censored those making them poets, dissenters, activists censured. The aftermath, approximately 655,000censured.  people killed.  The Human Cost of War in Iraq: A Mortality Study, 2002-2006,  Bloomsburg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University (Baltimore, Maryland); School of Medicine, Al Mustansiriya University (Baghdad, Iraq); in cooperation with the Center for International Studies, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Cambridge, Massachusetts). The figure just cited 655,000 dead resulted fromcited a household survey conducted at actual sites, in Iraq,sites,  not the Pentagon, or White House, or a newsroom, or someone s imagination. Of course, language has beencourse,  corrupted. Look, the President, who speaks coarsely, coarsely,  says,  We must stay the course.  The problem withcourse.  Let your conscience be your guide  is you must firstconscience be aware, conscious, of the fact that a moral principleconscious is a subjective thing. I wonder: when one  smokes  em out of a hole,  if the person doing the smoking is conscious of his conscience at work. Am I fully consciousconsciousconscienceconscious of how I arrived at this? The continual disseminationcontinual of similar images and ideas. The continual aired footagecontinual  of planes striking the towers, the towers crumbling to the streets, dust, screams, a continuous reel of destruction,continuous  fear, as if the attacks were happening twenty-four hours a day, every day, any time. For a while, I couldn t care lesscouldn t care less about war. Then I saw corpses, of boys, who looked just like me. This was 1982, at age ten. Ever since, I couldn t care less why anyone would want it.couldn t care less In 1982, any one of those boys could have been me.could have  Now, it s any one of those dead men could be me. The Secretary of State offered such counselcounsel to the ambassadors of the world that the United Nations Security Council nodded in favor of war. CriterionCouncilCriterion easily becomes criteria. Even easier: to no longercriteria.  require either. The data turned out false. The doctrinedata of preemption ultimately negated its need. While we both speak English, our languages are so different fromdifferent from each other, yours might as well be Greek to me. When the black man in the park asked,  Are you Mexican, Puerto Rican, or are you Pakistani?  and I said,  I m Arab,  and he replied,  Damn. Someone don t like you very much,  I understooddon t  perfectly what he meant. The President alluded to the Crusades because of (not due to) a lackdue to of knowledge. Later, he retracted the statement, worried it might offend the Middle East; it never occurred to him the offense taken was due to due to  the bombs shredding them to bits and pieces.  You areeither with us or with the terrorists  (September 20, 2001).either   You re either with us or against us  (November 6, 2001).either  The day after, the disc jockey advocated, on air, a thirty-three cent solution (the cost of a bullet) to the problem of terrorists in our midst he meant in New York; also, by terrorists, I wonder did he know he meant cab drivers, hot dog vendors, students, bankers, neighbors, passersby, New Yorkers, Americans; did he know he also meant Sikhs, Hindus, Iranians, Africans, Asians; did he know, too, he meant Christians, Jews, Buddhists, Atheists; did he realize he was elicitingeliciting a violent response, on the radio, in the afternoon? Among those who did not find the remark at all illicit:illicit: the owners of the radio station, the FCC, the mayor, the governor, members of the House, the Senate, the President of the United States. Emigrate is betterEmigrate  than immigrate. Proof: no such thing as illegal emigration.immigrate. emigration. Further proof: emigration is never an election issue. I heard enthusiastic speeches. They hate our freedoms,enthusiastic  our way of life, our this, that, and the other, and so onand so on (not etc). Not everyone agreed every one not  with us everyone every one  was  against us.  Detroit was farther from home farther  than my father ever imagined. He convinced himself soon after arriving here he had ventured further further than he should have. Fewer people live in his hometownFewer  than when he left, in 1966. The number, even less,less, following thirty-four straight days of aerial bombardment.First (not firstly) my father spoke Arabic; secondFirst firstly) second (not secondly) he spoke broken English; third (not thirdly)secondly) third thirdly) he spoke Arabic at home and English at work;fourth (not fourthly) he refused to speak Englishfourth fourthly)  anymore. Not every poem is good. Not every poemgood.  does well. Not every poem is well, either. Nor doeswell,  every poem do good.  To grow the economy good.  is more than jargon. Can a democracy growgrow without violence? Ours didn t. They still plan to growgrow tomatoes this year, despite what was done. Several men, civilian workers, identified as enemies, were hanged on a bridge, bodies torched, corpseshanged  swaying in the breeze. Photographs of the dead were hung with care. I can hardly describe what ishung hardly  going on. Day after day, he told himself,  I amhimself,  an American. I eat apple pie. I watch baseball. I speak American English. I read American poetry. I was born in Detroit, a city as American as it gets. I vote. I work. I pay taxes, too many taxes. I own a car. I make mortgage payments. I am not hungry. I worry less than the rest of the world. I could stand to lose a few pounds. I eat several types of cuisine on a regular basis. I flush toilets. I let the faucet drip. I have central air conditioning. I will never starve to death or experience famine. I will never die of malaria. I can say whatever the fuck I please.  Even words succumbed; hopefully turned intohopefully  a kind of joke; hopeful, a slur. However, I use the words,hopeful, However,  but less, with more care. The President impliedimplied compassion; but inferred otherwise. This is notinferred  meant to be ingenious. Nor is it ingenuous.ingenious. ingenuous. The more he got into it, the more he saw poetry,into  like language, was in a constant state of becoming.in Regardless, or because of this, he welcomed the misuseRegardless,  of language. Language is its own worst enemy its it s the snake devouring its own tail. They thoughtit s its  of us not kind of or sort of but as somewhat American.kind of sort of somewhat Lie:  To recline or rest on a surface?  No.  To putLie or place something?  No. Depleted uranium, heavy like lead; its use uranium shells led to birth defects.leadled  When in his anger the man said,  We re going to teach them a lesson,  I wonder what he thoughtteach  they would learn. In a war, a soldier is less likelylearn. less likely to die than a civilian. He looks like he hates our freedoms.like  You don t know them like I do. He looks as if he hateslike as  our freedoms. You don t know them as I do.as  When in his sorrow my father said,  Everybodyloose in war,  I knew exactly what he meant. It may beloose may be poets should fight wars. Maybe then, metaphors Maybe  not bodies, not hillsides, not hospitals, not schools  will explode. I might have watched the popular sitcommight have  if not for my family they were under attack, they might have died. Others may have been laughingmight have may have  at jokes while bodies were being torn apart. I could not risk that kind of laughter. Of all the mediamedia covering war, which medium best abolishes the truth?medium  I deceive myself. I will deceive you myself. In the Bronx,myself. myself.  I passed as Puerto Rican. I passed as Greek in Queens,passed passed  also Brazilian, Pakistani, Bangladeshi, even a famous, good-looking American movie actor. As Iranian in Manhattan. At the mall in New Jersey, the sales clerk guessed Italian. Where Henry Ford was born, my hometown, I always pass as Arab.pass  I may look like the men in the great paintings of the Near East but their lives, their ways, I assure you, are in the past. Plus, except in those paintings,past. Plus,  or at the movies, I never saw Arabs with multiple wives, or who rode camels, lived in silk tents, drank from desert wells; moreover, it s time to move past that.moreover, past  Did language precede violence? Can violence proceedprecede proceed without language? It broke my father s heart to talk about the principle of equal justice. principle  The news aired several quotations from the airlinequotations  passengers, one of whom was a middle-aged man with children, who said,  I didn t feel safe with them on board.  He used the word  them  though only one, an Arab, was on the plane. Being from Detroit, I couldn t help but think of Rosa Parks. Then I got angry. I said to the TV, to no one in particular,  If you don t feel safe, then you get off the goddamn plane.  You can quote mequote  on that. I was really angry not real angry,really real  but really angry. The reason? A poet asked mereally reason why I didn t write poems about Muslim and Arab violence against others, and I said I did. And then he said he meant violence against Americans and Israelis,respectively, and I said I did, and before I couldrespectively,  go on he interrupted to ask why I didn t write poems about mothers who sent their sons and daughters on suicide missions. As if, as if, as if. I respectfullyrespectfully decline to answer any more questions. Write your own goddamn poem! Does this poem gratify the physical senses? Does it use sensuous language? It certainly does notsensuous  attempt to gratify those senses associated with sexual pleasure. In this way, it may not be a sensual poem.sensual  However, men have been known to experience sexual gratification in situations involving power, especially over women, other men, life, and language. My father said,  No matter how angry they make you, invite the agents in the house, offer them coffee, be polite. If they stay long, ask them to sit. Otherwise,sit.  they will try to set you straight.  When in hisset  frustration he said,  Should of, could of, would of, Should of,  he meant,  Stop, leave me alone, I refuse to examine the problem further.  Because (not since) the terroristssince attacked us, we became more like the rest of the world than ever before. This is supposed to be a poem;supposed  it is supposed to be in a conversation with you.supposed  Be sure to participate.  No language is more violentsure to than another,  he said. Then he laughed, and said,than Then   Except the one you use.  Do conflicts of interest exist when governments award wartime contracts to companies that have close ties to government officials?that  From 1995 to 2000, Dick Cheney, Vice President of the United States, was CEO of Halliburton,which is headquartered in Houston, Texas,which  near Bush International Airport. Would they benefitthemselves by declaring war? Please send those menthemselves those  back home. My grandfather lay there unconscious.there  For days, there was no water, no medicine, nothingthere  to eat. The soldiers left their footprints at the doorstep.their  His sons and daughters, they re now grieving him.they re   Try not to make too much of it  was the advice givento too  after two Homeland Security agents visited my house,two  not once, not twice, but three times. I m waiting forwaiting for my right mind. The language is a long ways from here.ways  After the bombs fell, I called every night to find outwhether my father was alive or dead. He always asked,whether   How s the weather there?  Soon enough, he assured me,weather  things would return to normal, that (not where)that where a ceasefire was on the way. Although (not while)Although while I spoke English with my father, he replied in Arabic. Then I wondered, who s to decide whose language it iswho s whose  anyway you, me? your mother, father, books,your  perspective, sky, earth, ground, dirt, dearly departed, customs, energy, sadness, fear, spirit, poetry, God, dog, cat, sister, brother, daughter, family, you, poems,you,  nights, thoughts, secrets, habits, lines, grievances, breaks, memories, nightmares, mornings, faith, desire, sex, funerals, metaphors, histories, names, tongues, syntax, coffee, smoke, eyes, addiction, witness, paper, fingers, skin, you, your, you re here, there, the sky,you your you re the rain, the past, sleep, rest, live, stop, go, breathe

Of course we failed, by succeeding. The fiery cherub becomes his smothering. A greedy heart dives into a dream Of power or truth, and wakes up middle-aged In some committee room. It is eating paper instead of God. We two are one, my bird, this is a wedding.   When love was war, you swore you d burn Your life and die at thirty-five. I said good riddance, Bright hairy boy, I will beat you, down, Tear you to monkey shreds, survive like earth, Owl-eyed, because I wanted to see everything Black and permanent and kill you with your theories. We used to wake up sweaty and entangled.   Thirty, home, and work. We cohabit in a functioning machine. There is violence, somewhere else. Do we wish this? It occurs, The flayed combatant, the dismembered child, The instruments in the basement. We must wish it. See, Between us is peace, our babies are plump, I know you, I caress you, I fail you. My faith adheres In nothing. Don t leave me, don t leave me.  

One writes telling me I am her guiding light And my poems her bible   on this cold morning   After moss I smoke one cigarette And hear a magpie chatter in the paddock,   The image of Hatana   he bashes at the windows In idiot spite, shouting    Pakeha! You can be    The country s leading poet    at the church I murmured,  Tena koe,' To the oldest woman and she replied,  Tena koe     Yet the red book is shut from which I should learn Maori And these daft English words meander on,   How dark a light! Hatana, you have gripped me Again by the balls; you sift and riddle my mind   On the rack of the middle world, and from my grave at length A muddy spring of poems will gush out.  

I ve always felt as if I were in a cage. If I stick out an arm, I m seen as wanting and taking. A leg: my violence is noted. When I mentioned the suffocation by my father, they made it autobiographical. The subtext of my work in iron has been ignored, lost in discussions of time, not space. What you ll never understand about installations is that everyone else is always outside of them. I m stuck inside. The move toward deliberate transience is the mark of a fool. If disappearing is inevitable, you must fight it. No one misses the prisoner. The bars are like a frame: you want in as much as I have always wanted out.

I was given a city, with coffee and sunlight.  The coin-purse smell of the subway,  I wrote. In the mornings policemen would stand, lightstruck and pleasured, over trays of danish. Mornings I wrote and workmen raised up their nets. Hallelujah the brick, the debris! I was given a city. The city got between me and God. 
I was given a house. The curtains breathed over wide sills. There was a leaf in the middle of the floor, I loved the crispness of the leaf. I loved the privacy of sills. The sills sailed, I fell into the sills. The sills got between me and God.
 
I was given a mud hut. The walls curved to meet the ceiling like a tongue curves to make a word.
 
I was given God, with salt and sweet together. I was given a piece of meat. I loved the flesh. I was given bread only. I was given only water. I loved the coolness of the water. The water got between me and the feast.
 
I had an empty plate and there was the color of it. I cannot even describe the color of it.
 
I was given a cell with a window. There was a certain light at evening. 
I was given nothing but the air, and the air dazzled.
 

Little soul, do you remember? You once walked over wooden boards to a house that sat on stilts in the sea. It was early. The sun painted brightness onto the water, and wherever you sat that path led directly to you. Some mornings the sea-road was muted scratched tin, some mornings blinding. Then it would leave. Little soul, it is strange    even now it is early.

... and we remarked on how piranhas, in uncounted numbers, are capable of consuming an entire ampersand in such-and-such a time frame. The sun was up, and below, and was somewhere overhead. And I thought....     ... and we shared thick and hearty laughs, and continued into the very dense jungle. And thick. Preceding us on the trailsides were ruins overgrown, boots stuck in mud, and heads of sunken ampersands. Which made sense to us, for....     ... and the rainy seasons came, and went, and came. And day, and further day. And February was unusually warm, and this, in a zone renowned for unusually warm Februaries. We cooled our hands on ampersands, which warmed again when....     ... and you took my hand, and clasped it, tighter than I could stand it, tighter than mud clasping ampersands still. And so I fell, and you held me as I, unstanding, looked up at lianas in trees    the monkey skyways that    ....     ... and the language we used with each other became thicker. We looked together at some ludicrous, large leaf   larger than us both, and thicker even than several large ampersands, together. We used thick language to describe it, then....     ... and we grew ravenous and set camp. And established a village. Built huts with cots, and plots of land for farms. We grew ampersands there and ate them, and when through with their husks, threw them into our yards, where....     ... and you took me, deeper into jungle, with the wild dogs and boars, and cackling beasts, and beasts that swung in silence. Dangling from the tufts, saliva strands from ampersands obscured us in the roughs. We toweled and traveled and tired and....     ... and the birds became aware of our presence, though we desired to blend in. We made tangible feathers from intangible thoughts, stuck beaks to our mouths using ampersand glue. We sat in our colors, without motion for days, until....     ... and you communed with insensible arrangements: changeable organizations; shapeless distractions; puffs of dimension; ampersands; the dead. I pulled you close and kissed you, but all I could taste was vortex, and sweet guava, and the distances to....     ... and we grew thicker together, for I too could perceive, in the dry expanses, forms of invisible logos made thick   the un-wet language of communicable waves. We washed ourselves in it, but our feet, touching ampersands, touched not the....     ... and you dipped your foot, from the riverbank into the river, where the piranhas began eating. And I sat, looking at my hands. Sat, for there was nothing I could say. On the riverbank, alone. There, with whatever remained. &....

One of us is a faucet reconciling to the temperature of indifference. This is the world: the drawer assembled by you pinches a finger before yielding.There are so many foreigners here, I said, when I first steppedThere are so many foreigners here onto a beach in Virginia. I had an idea of the ocean, and of who I was. I am in water now, attempting to see the ocean. We lick our wounds with the same tongue.   Long accustomed to carrying a gauze for shield, the heart wraps bruises like dumplings. I see the sun through my neighbour's window, whelked in lace. Is this what we mean when we use the word "virtual"? Tulips grow even after they're cut. The ones I loved, having died without returning, crowd the heart's waiting room. To start all over again is to imagine the world is, as it is. I give up; I thought this was a poem about nation, the one she began at nineteen. The one she waits to return to: her eyes never adjusting to the colors of exile. This antechamber; this long incision called hope.   Last night I crossed to the other side, unwelcome territory. I might have been sad. My broke heart.   I'd been observing then, the sun's influence, subjugated by streetlights imitating moonlight. Even the sun softens, (I had thought to myself) to bring every image in view as a memory of some other place, some other text. Last night, I slept in a borrowed bed for guests I anticipated, as host to self's solitary marriage. I examined the world, thus altered. Later, standing at the precipice, I awoke. Even sleep did not take me back. And the signal being green I walked.  

my husband thinks we have too many chairs in our house. I know we need more, my friend has enough chairs, many many more than we have. I told my husband: chairs, picture frames   they are the same.     when my friend and her husband have talked about looking for a different place to live, one with space for the families of their six children, he says, "but I want this view." on the interior walls, facing away from the sea, are paintings of this view   "well, it's not exactly our view, but close"   taken somewhere on this small stretch of land near the lighthouse, the painting of their house really of the one next door, a corner of their house visible in the background (receding in the perspective). in the Whistleresque painting, the house next door is a train rushing forward through the night fog.     our daughter believing,                              acting as though (she believes) she can control the universe                                                                           externals, personal   at dinner, after three days joking of this (its urgency, extravagant tampering, how she commands and navigates, exhorts us: parents, boyfriend), I say, too bluntly, "so   have you thought of modifying                       your                    behavior?"                                              crude, hurt her, she cries, is embarrassed, she says, thinking the others in the restaurant have heard, "I know you don't mean to, but you're hard of hearing,                                                                            you talk too loud."         reading garden books the last week, immersed in gardens, in words, in visions of gardens   deer ate all the roses, the night Lily left the gate open     her husband wants this view, there is a place down the road, much larger, it has the same view (nearly). he wants to move there, but the houses are entirely different, the new one very formal, "a real house," my friend says. she is reluctant to leave her perfect   the perfect she created   structure. the chair, the frame, matter as much as the view they arrange.       ashamed, aware I've cut too close                                               "your behavior"                                  jokes are dismissable/admissible   this was criticism. I want to   apologize but do not   explanation       self-righteous (remember an earlier fight, when she lived with us, her shouting, "why do you always have to be right?" me shouting,                "because I AM!")         or sinking, return     the authenticity (not authority) of others  visions, seeing New York thirdhand at the moment of being there firsthand with my friend. my my interpretation of her memories   she d lived there   inextricable from my own immediately perceived visions.   descending into the subway on an August day, the steps down to an aqua pool filled with Perrier. everyone breathing in the airpockets the bubbles made, cool and floating under water. they rose from the subway refreshed.     her dream became my strongest image of the city       later, we go to the movies, split up at the multiplex, the men to a macho flick (we see the previews of their film/ glad we missed it).   she and I sit in the last row   she doesn't want anyone behind her   spatial                              boundary preemptive, compelling                                                                          throughout the movie she tells latecomers the two seats beside her are taken. I talk to her about                               imagining her aura                   I want to give her the house she wants.                   I love her so. I want her to know.                   like my mom         reading about newborn babies in the hospital, cribs ribboned in blue and pink, "as if that's not enough," she says, "the cribs are labeled: 'I'm a boy!' 'it's a girl!' "   looking out from oneself: I and thou. (bowing acknowledgment in that "thou": blessing.) looking out for oneself: I and it.     imagining her aura   huge and wide   so if someone sits near   it won't matter   she'll still have personal space   "I know, I know"   driving her Delta 88   and she squeezes my hand     her father out fishing on a boat in the afterlife (according to the psychic)   something about wine   your mother   tell her   "my mother doesn't drink"   tell your mother to stop whining.       it is not one view. from the same chair it s constantly changing, coloring, waving. from different chairs, more so. gradations. water, clearest of notices that we are (the world is) in constant motion.   putting forth first: we are? the world is?   world/we. moving out from where we are/moving in from out there. the ferry crossing back and forth to the mainline, to  America.  this place called simply, by islanders,  the island.  THE island. there is no other frame or chair, no need for description, the world is circumscribed.                                                                                                       For Becca, Betty, MarieFor Becca, Betty, Marie

But it is not always quiet here. Things go on while we sleep the sleep of soldiers. Ancient branches crack and splinter into dust. Large wings snap open in spring like carpets splayed out over the railing. Granite splits apart at the seams and great animals cleave roads through woods. Daily, in the density, there is life on the edge of the knife that cuts the world into hemispheres of sense and death. Trees are born and die, bones turn to humus, glaciers to meadowland. It is time to turn yourself loose, like new leaves, like big lakes on which swim enormous birds at a distance deeper in breadth than the water's depth. Their shadows pull you to the shore. Their size fills your lungs with sky. It is time to heave aside the boulders and the dams, to come back out like a bear after the thaw, to be ready for the forest, for the forage, for the full and waning moons. You will get soaked in wet grass, feel the insects pierce your skin. You will learn to balance between gravity and light. There will be hot and sticky nights, sharp songs at dawn, long and bright ineffable days. This is your chance to crash your way through underbrush unlocking like so many doors.

My father is a nod, a jilt. Bop. Insists that 90s music is the jams they will drop when I have children. Cancel the station with rap-crap, the cure for stiff-skin is the blunk of funk and lilt of lips that pickles like sound-curry.

When I see the two cops laughing  after one of them gets shot because this is TV and one says while putting pressure on the wound,Haha, you're going to be fine,Haha, you're going to be fine, and the other says, I know, haha!, I know, haha! as the ambulance arrives  I know the men are white. I think of a clip from the hours  of amateur footage I've seen when another man at an intersection gets shot, falls, and bleeds from a hole the viewer knows exists only by the way  the dark red pools by the standing cop's feet, gun now holstered, who yells the audience back to the sidewalk. I know which one is dying  while black and which one stands by white.  I think this morning about the student  in my class who wrote a free write line  on the video I played that showed a man pouring water on his own chest, "...the homoerotic  scene against a white sky" with no other men  present. Who gets to see and who followsWho gets to see and who followswhat script? I ask my students. what scrip Whose lines are these and by what hand are they written?  

What half-blind is like: like two microscopes in my head each with differently stuck objectives. They enable the small and the very small and reduce everything else to blur and shade. Yet you can train even this. Train it to spot the shape of sharks  teeth, of which there are many samples and many shapes but not as many as flecks of sand, pieces of shell. I have hundreds plucked from the shore. But in the same beach I buried a toy and never found it again. A tiny toy: articulate, a translucent man, a smallness to whom the world was an unbounded wonder. Blemished and damaged I would hold him up and say He is broken and anyone who could see would say He looks fine to me.He looks fine to me But they can see well, not finely. Look at his face, etched and serrated by that gargantuan saw. The cracked shell of his translucent skin, buried in rubble now, and those teeth, all that remain of terrible and invisible jaws.

Salvador, if I return on a summer day, so humid my thumbwill clean your beard of  salt, and if  I touch your volcanic face,will clean your beard of  salt, and if  I touch your volcanic face, kiss your pumice breath, please don t let cops say: he s gangster.he s gangsterDon t let gangsters say: he s wrong barrio. Your barriosDon t let gangsters say: he s wrong barrio. Your barrioshe s wrong barrio stain you with pollen, red liquid pollen. Every day copsand gangsters pick at you with their metallic beaks,and gangsters pick at you with their metallic beaks, and presidents, guilty. Dad swears he ll never return,Mom wants to see her mom, and in the news:Mom wants to see her mom, and in the news: every day black bags, more and more of us leave. Parents say:don t go; you have tattoos. It s the law; you don t knowdon t go; you have tattoos. It s the law; you don t knowdon t go; you have tattoos. It s the law; you don t knowwhat law means there.  But what do they know? We don twhat law means therehave greencards. Grandparents say: nothing happens here.have greencards. Grandparents say: nothing happens here.nothing happens here Cousin says: here, it s worse. Don t come, you could be    ...    here, it s worse. Don t come, you could beStupid Salvador, you see our black bags,Stupid Salvador, you see our black bags, our empty homes, our fear to say: the war has never stopped,the war has never stopped,and still you lie and say: I m fine, I m fine,and still you lie and say: I m fine, I m fine,I m fine, I m fine, but if  I don t brush Abuelita s hair, wash her pots and pans,I cry. Like tonight, when I wish you made itI cry. Like tonight, when I wish you made it easier to love you, Salvador. Make it easierto never have to risk our lives.to never have to risk our lives.

The small grey cloudy louse that nests in my beard Is not, as some have called it,  a pearl of God      No, it is a fiery tormentor Waking me at two a.m.   Or thereabouts, when the lights are still on In the houses in the pa, to go across thick grass   Wet with rain, feet cold, to kneel For an hour or two in front of the red flickering   Tabernacle light   what He sees inside My meandering mind I can only guess     A madman, a nobody, a raconteur Whom He can joke with    Lord,  I ask Him,    Do You or don t You expect me to put up with lice?  His silent laugh still shakes the hills at dawn.

Anyone who begins a sentence with,  In all honesty ...   is about to tell a lie. Anyone who says,  This is how I feel  had better love form more than disclosure. Same for anyone who thinks he thinks well because he had a thought. If  you say,  You re ugly  to an ugly person   no credit for honesty, which must always be a discovery, an act that qualifies as an achievement. If  you persist you re just a cruel bastard, a pig without a mirror, somebody who hasn t examined himself enough. A hesitation hints at an attempt to be honest, suggests a difficulty is present. A good sentence needs a clause or two, interruptions, set off  by commas, evidence of a slowing down, a rethinking. Before I asked my wife to marry me, I told her I d never be fully honest. No one, she said, had ever said that to her. I was trying to be radically honest, I said, but in fact had another motive. A claim without a  but  in it is, at best, only half  true. In all honesty, I was asking in advance to be forgiven.

The body wicks away its nest, leaves sediment. In salt the silhouette of a wolf or a sheepshead. Who knows who steals bones if  not the connoisseur of  bones, and who drops a crank behind the body if  not the one who drains the river bed? In unrest, buzzards. Or a flat line. The probability of  sparrows a spark between two enemy pistons. A dirigible built solely for the grave.

My bones tied up with his bones at night, him falling asleep in my arm after wrasslin me, calling it love in some kind of low whisper no dog would believe. I know his every smell, every way the littlest corner of him be stinkin underneath me, on top of me, while our children snore in the corner, then he creep out the way he creep in, before the cock crow at the sun. In daylight he act like we strangers, on the edge of the field, his little tan children of mine turning brown, playing more than working cause they his children, Missy look over at me while I look  over at her, both of us got some kind of papers on this same man that say he own both of us, the man who owes us even we he die cause the Bible say you gotta look after the widow. But when he die it will be cause Missy and me locked eyes many days and hated him like one wronged woman made out of two, him standing up there on the porch studyin everything  his eyes lit up like he the Lord of all creation. hush now, night wind on my skin, hush now bird lost in trees, hush now, hungry moon  

I m gently rowing and the birds look sewn to the surface of the water as it undulates to the sound of Sean talking beautifully about something I don t really understand. But all I m picturing are brown paper bags with little grease spots near the bottom seams that have recorded the way sausage rolls have touched them, or the thin waists of dogs as depicted in medieval hunting frescos, or a cherub s fat little hand gesturing to a vista where smiling families are meeting to picnic with the animals that God has also saved, or I m thinking about the mechanics of bagpipes, the legs and arms and the fat belly and the long neck with its holes. This has been the best day ever. Sean smiles. He s wearing shorts, and so am I. It s sunny! Mine are so short they may as well be underpants, and I still don t understand a word that he is saying.

The economical ikebana of the lesser octopus is disarming,   a sextopus, holding its intelligence & ink   in a concentrate. Not some sloppy octopus who suddenly   freaks, so princessy, rich. Driven to abstraction not unlike flowers   dropping their petals because petals are garbage off the bloom,   not expensive anymore thus going inside to find meaning.   Cut the eyes, then, from the cruel ikebana of the racehorse    if a leg breaks she can't bear her own weight,   long-blossomed head turns to glue and the fortune   zooms off like flies from a carcass when shooed.   The tripod fell so I had to cast about for my crutch   to walk over my bad left knee buckling  to right it.   I want to take a picture of the flowers I arranged   after an ikebana class, just one. I quit quickly   but still hope to learn to arrange beauty classically.   Maybe I'm lazy, or don't apply the rules to myself,   or maybe "laze" is just "zeal" rearranged, as in my case.   Even now, the clock we need to punch out on is too far   away to plug in, so power collects in its hands. 

The healer said to me: it worked because you thought it would. I it worked because you thought it would let him palm my belly and chest; sometimes he shook and closed his eyes. Inches above my skin, he'd sweep his hands like smoothing sheets I couldn't see. I left our bed for years when I was sick. I understood our children then: bed meant missing out; bed felt like punishment. Now I sleep best at the edge where the healer sat to rest. Your hand reches for my hip, holds on. Our children's mouths sigh open in the dark. They're not surprised: the healer touched me, and it worked. They've seen magicians   beneath the sheet that's pulled away, something's always gone. 

refuge temple refuge templerefuge temple254 Purdy Street, Buffalo, NY, childhood home of Lucille Clifton254 Purdy Street, Buffalo, NY, childhood home of Lucille Clifton There will be another storm always on the air Or in the air or are you the air Cold unrecognizable following The inside road This vessel bears one through Snow or time to find the house Paint peeling and maybe unfamiliar but the address Is to a place that doesn t exist anymore An empty lot Now owned by the woman Next door who leases it to a Storefront church that needs the space for parking I take a selfie with the snowbank 254 Purdy Street Sunday morning they will plow and cars will fill the place Worshippers filing next door Names of the family who lived here forgottenSayles their name was SaylesSayles their name was Sayles Well there s Miss Bowden says the neighbor Who lives over there Ninety years old Lived here her whole life If anyone d remember she would Though if the house don t hold against the world And the body don t hold against the world Snow falling down What can hold The church house the neighbor next door The snow Old Miss Bowden This empty lot We empty now Everybody drive home Song done over Snow river hover House is gone Stormsent era That Miss Bowden may remember The twelve-fingered girl who lived here We tell the neighbor: her name was Lucille Playing in the street Afraid of the dark Bringing the light   salon des refus s salon des refus ssalon des refus sEast Side, Cleveland, OH, apartment building of Julie PattonEast Side, Cleveland, OH, apartment building of Julie Patton In the house of Julie Patton Bumblebees do sing pollen In the cave of ears Every thing listens Jimi, Barack, and Marilyn Buck The saints of the place In vigil of excellent beings Light poles hold typical beasts Though here they empty themselves Into me Orange spaces do make A world again for though the gods are mythic The goddesses spin Dear Julie sing Me through the long hallway The dark one sleeved in your mother s States of mind State of mine is the one that opens my body In heat through dark and salted moments Body is a book House does quiver Unwritten the way of how to find you House is the book In the language of feathers that launch Whose heart could race Winter air winter season that rushes How we in dark are slung The dark that opens its hallways Time mastered by Shiva and Hanuman I did stand in the empty space Filled by snow Then here in the sun-flirted front room Watched by Saint Nina Simone and Saint Joan Baez and Saint  Buffy Sainte-Marie I wonder forward in Sapphic tongue Who is remember me Who is open me with their tongue Who languages the space of a house that don t exist Better thought sun see Julie sing sanctified Sing swung sing one and one and one and one   school house school houseschool houseBarrington, Rhode Island, right near the Bay, home of C.D. Wright  and Forrest GanderBarrington, Rhode Island, right near the Bay, home of C.D. Wright  and Forrest Gander When she gives me directions and describes it to me I expect a red-room schoolhouse Driving across the water from Providence Into the stream-laced far shore Far shore where a boat unlands To determine the shape of what isn t There I drive past wrong streets Wrong houses places whose bells I ring Stranger in the forest and dark-skinned too Where do I belong From the bathhouse I came Where I worshiped at all manner of strange altars Does this make me more or less human Tongue makes you human And how it translates the body into language To find the door as it was described to me Frosted glass and Japanese characters lining it School saying the language of the sun No sums add up here But she calls me in And I frown to know long to know What holds the house against the world How will words survive the dissolution of the body Of the planet s core Sore and soar it came down through the cloud cover Gray-white curtains House of a dozen languages At the cold lake the far away lake She grabbed me post-lecture where I told about how I could not translate the words of the poet until I came to her own sun-loved city She begged me to always love all manner of strangers I thought she meant the regions of the body I d have promised her anything though years later in Rhode Island Named for an island no one can find Lover I love you forever House that disappeared Books that live in the air Island that no one knows While on Purdy Street good people park their cars in the snow Go inside and sing We don t have nothing more than this anymore No planet no lover no words no nothing no more

                                                                                         & hear my streets with ragged beats & the beats are too beat to live so the graves push out with hands that cannot touch the makers of light & the sun flames down through the roofs & the roots that slide to one side & the whistlin' fires of the cops & the cops in the shops do what they gotta do & your body's on the fence & your ID's in the air & the shots get fired & the gas in the face & the tanks on your blood & the innocence all around & the spillin' & the grillin' & the grinnin' & the game of Race no one wanted & the same every day so U fire & eat the smoke thru your long bones & the short mace & the day? This last sweet Swisher day that turns to love & no one knows how it came or what it is or what it says or what it was or what for or from what gate is it open is it locked can U pull it back to your life filled with bitter juice & demon angel eyes even though you pray & pray mama says you gotta sing she says you got wings but from what skies from where could they rise what are the things the no-things called love how can its power be fixed or grasped so the beats keep on blowin' keep on flyin' & the moon tracks your bed where you are alone or maybe dead & the truth carves you carves you & calls you back still alive cry cry the candles by the last four trees still soaked in Michael Brown red and Officer Liu red and Officer Ramos red and Eric Garner whose last words were not words they were just breath askin' for breath they were just burnin  like me like we are all still burnin' can you hear me can you can you feel me swaggin' tall & driving low & talkin' fine & hollerin' from my corner crime & fryin                                                                              against the wall   almost livin' almost dyin' almost livin' almost dyin'  

One son plays monster rage. His brother plays ship crashed in a maze. We are reading Hulk. We are reading Theseus. White sails, green men, bright women who give everything and get nothing. The monster son would never sail a ship into a maze, but brothers are not the same. They hear the same stories and make different toys of them, muscled figures in their fists, walls of wood and magnets. Who knows why a part of me always departs this place, glides out the window to rain and falling leaves, dresses of wetness and gold. She floats there, blessed by air, but when she tries to slip back in, she can t; she hangs beyond the glass, panicked, then bulging with fury. Days later another part of me flies, into a maple the color of platelets, and another into bareness and sky. I ve lost count of how many fists are now pounding my house, how many mouths are braying how many cries, but here inside, for now, my dear sons call to me for their fallen castles, built again, to find all the missing arrows.

I held a jackhammer once. It matched me   in height and weight and I planned destruction, ripped   everything solid from the ground. The concrete was my prey,   but it was the tool I fought to master, its metal body   trembling beneath my hands. Or, perhaps, its electric heart   was what shook me through my last held bones.   The concrete, gone, the rented machinery, returned    and I wondered if Sisyphus had imagined a garden where the rock came from.

So you see why it could not have been a more humble moment. If there was any outward sign of regalia It might have been the twilight crowning of the day, just then, A perfect moment of dusk, but changing, as a wave does Even as you admire it. Because the southbound stop Mirrors the one northbound where we so often find ourselves At the beginning, southbound s return holds the memory Of northbound s setting-out, and the grassy median between With its undisturbed trees defines an elusive strip of the present Where no one lives. After twenty-eight years of the trip, It s like two beakers of colored water   one green, one blue    Have poured themselves back and forth, because On one side we are tinted by remembering the other. But this aspect of the journey, at least, we know we will repeat. As dusk cohered that moment   aquas, pinks, violets    Just at that moment as I was returning to the car A woman came the other way, her two young daughters Holding her hands, and the gloaming sparkled around them So that I froze, as they were backlit, starry, They were the southbound reminder of who I had been beginning The trip. She didn t look like me, but what I did recognize Was her clarity of purpose, in what Sharon Olds calledthe days of great usefulness, making life as nicethe days of great usefulness As she could for them, always writing the best story, And also, beneath her skin, living with delight as quiet As the shoots anchoring grass beneath the earth. I walked back to my car. My husband sat in the driver s seat, Our weekend s luggage thrown in back.Tell me we really had those girls, I said,Tell me we really had those girlsand that they held my hands like that. When I got homeand that they held my hands like that. I pictured her helping them each into bed   I knew it was Later than she had hoped   then reading Each section of the paper s terrible news, finally alone.

That autumn was abundant In Istanbul the ancient and platinum Women with their faces covered and discovered My grandfather arrived on foot to this Ottoman city From the desolate Sebastopol and from other burned villages, From the bloody snow. He spoke about its minarets Certainly he loved the fields of leaves. Autumn, like a river or     a glowing bonfire And I don't know where he went to pray, Or perhaps he no longer did so in the city of the sultans But I know in his mouth he carried a needle Noble metaphor of his trade. Perhaps he wandered astonished throughout lovely Istanbul Searching for sustenance or clients Perhaps inclined, he entered one of the thousand mosques Where he prayed While the clocks stood still, Geographies were erased. Because the city was merely a golden breeze falling upon the      leaves A multitude of lights upon the holy minarets, My grandfather, A Jewish tailor also took refuge in Istanbul Also another small Jewish city Among the thresholds of history.    

nun meets me at the station,    first month with carol and dick reynolds.  set the table.  clean the kitchen.  vacuum.set the table. clean the kitchenvacuumthank god she didn't ask me to take care of the children.thank god she didn't ask me to take care of the children i dry  dishes in the afternoon.   watch her can apples from the backyard, put them in the cellar dark to save for winter.why is everything so quiet?   why does the man come homewhy is everything so quiet?   why does the man come home from school everyday at 3:30 and read the paper?   why a different casserole on the table every night and everyone eats one portion and one portion only?  why is there always enough, but never too much. . . try to understand this quiet, busy woman.   is she content? what are her reasons to can, to cook, to have three children and a pregnant girl in her house? try to be close, lie next to their quiet ticking bedroom and hear no sound, night after night, except soft conversation.   in the morning, before light, i hear the baby's first cry.  i picture her in there with her bra unhooked and her heavy white breast like cream on the cheek of that baby. inside i wonder what she thinks,  feels,  who she is.   and every night it gets dark earlier, stays dark later.   i don't want to wake up smiling at cereal, dark overshadows snow, and a fear comes into my cold heart:  i am alone.i am alone one afternoon, drying dishes, her cutting apples by the sink, i ask her about college.   i picture her so easily in penny loafers, peck and peck collar, socks, and a plaid skirt on her skinny still unchilded body.   here she is today with hips and breasts, a woman thirty who had taught school  she must have some thoughts, some arguments and passions hidden in this kitchen. finally, she tells me her favorite book is the stranger.the stranger we go and find it on the living room shelf.   i wonder, though she never says, what she understands about being a stranger. i meet her mother.   all the same they treat me all the same: human.   i am accepted, never question who i am or why.   never make me feel unwanted or afraid, but always human love and never passion, never clutching need, lopsided devouring want, never, not one minute, extending those boundaries to enclose me. . .                                                                                        oh soul,oh soul                                                                                                        i feel cold and unused to such space as breath and eternity around me.                              so much room in silence. . .so much room in silence how will my house ever run on silence, when in me theremy is such noise, such hatred for peeling apples, canning, and waking to feed baby, and alarm clocks in the soul, and in the skin of baby, in the rind of oranges, apples, peels in the garbage, and paper saved because it is cheaper to save and wrap and wash and use everything again.   and clean, no screaming in that house, no tears, one helping at dinner, and no lovemaking noises like broken squeaky beds.   where is that part i cannot touch no matter where or how i turn, that part that wants to cry: SISTER, and make us touch. . .SISTER she is kind.   though i never understand such kindness, cannot understand the inner heart of how and why she loves: i am the stranger.i am the stranger   somewhere in the back of my mind, they are either fools or the holy family, the way we all should be if we lived in a perfect world and didn't have to strive to be loved, but went about our quiet business, never raising our voices above the rest, never questioning if we are loved, or whether what we do is what we want to do, or worth it. and if they are fools who don't have hearts or brains or cords in their necks to speak,  then why have they asked for me?   why am i in their house?   why are they doing this? one night in my round black coat and leotards, i dress up warm against the constellations, go down the snowy block alone in time.   i am only going to the drugstore, but for some reason, the way i feel, pregnantly beautiful walking into the bright fluorescent drugstore, it is the most vivid night in my mind in the whole darkening november.  

 There is no muse of translation,  the translator reminds as he struggles with Pindar s victory odes, and what he means is that the imagery is overwhelming: the hissing of snakes as Medusa s sisters mourn her death, the baby Iamos  lying on a bed of yellow and purple violets,  Heracles with his baby hands strangling the two serpents sent  to devour him on the day of his birth  so every translator must beware of  rank transplantation.  Just imagine, if one were to translate the line as  Forge your tongue on the anvil of truth.  How ridiculous that admonition to a king. Better to transpose to the vague modern, though Pindar  perversely, from our point of view often seems to relish... the concrete image,  and it s just there that I think perhaps all being is translation; the child I was at the kitchen table, translating my mother into my father, my father into my mother; each one s  inviolate honey  becoming the  blameless venom  of the other. So now I too prefer the naked tongue, even pained and writing, caught in hammer and tongs, flexed and torqued upon the anvil, until the metal turns mercurial, quick, spilling into and out of the shape of everything that is. For all day, while that pair of grey-eyed serpents feeds the abandoned child on honey, and the e-mail box fills with a multitude of voices debating the distinctions of the hoaxes of authorship the pseudonym, the heteronym, all the masks we can put on I have trembled because of my tongue. Because it insisted upon saying I love you. So it waits and waits for some word from you.I love you.  It s late in the afternoon when you finally reply and then to the quote I sent to a list. I read obliquely, wondering if I should hope because you say you re thinking of Shakespeare s sonnets (the beloved and the lover s love) or if I m lost to the shadows you re going off to dispel with a cup of coffee, that  best  at the end of your letter, my allotment from now on. Is it too much love or too little that I have translated into being? Oh by now I m mistyping forget your tongue upon the anvilforget  that the tongue itself has made.  

Around the pool the hippos drool as if the chloride wouldn t kill them. In fact, they like to play the fool, the harbinger, the pilgrim. The bird that plops into the glass makes a sound, then isn t there. Spiders toss, in oleaginous mass, Goo Gone into the air. The ants that drag a beat-up car onto the lawn are emissaries of some forgotten prince or tsar from an HBO miniseries. The cheetah, panther, jaguar, and lynx (some of these might be the same) conjure images of Sphinx and other trademarked names. The dynamited hole now teems with insects shiny and obscene, crawling, dying, though it dreams an ectoplasm of green. My own two cats stiffen, confused at this profusion past the door. They bat at things they ve often used for sound therapy before. I tell you this out of principle: that spiraling around a theme (while naming lots of animals) can supercharge a meme. My own skin founders in the rush of allergenic, if cautious, beasts. Eyes eye darkness, ears hear hush    the assassin s humor feasts.

            I want to go home, Patricia whispered.                                                 I won't say I like being in prison, but I have learned a lot, and I like experiences. The terriblest part is being away from your families. Juanita                                                       I miss my screenporch. I know every word to every song on Purple Rain. WilliePurple Rain.             I'm never leaving here. Grasshopper, in front of the woodshop, posing beside a coffin he built             This is a kicks' camp. Nothing positive come out of here except the praying. Never been around this many women in my life. Never picked up cursing before. down for manslaughter, forty years                                                       I've got three. One's seven. One, four. One, one. I'm twenty-three. The way I found out is, I was in an accident with my brother. He was looking at some boys playing ball. We had a head-on.             At the hospital, the doctor says, Miss, why didn't you tell us you were pregnant. I'm pregnant? I wasn't afraid of my mama. I was afraid of my daddy. I was supposed to be a virgin. He took it real good though.             The last time you was here I had a headful of bees.             See what I did was, I accidentally killed my brother.                                                                                     He spoke without inflection.             Asked how many brothers and sisters did he have              On my mother's side, two brothers, well now, one brother, and                  two sisters.             On my father's side, fifteen sisters. When I handed Franklin his prints, his face broke.Damn, he said to no one, I done got old.Damn, I done got old.                                                 I kept a dog. When you walk through Capricorn, keep your arms down and close to      your body.                                                      That's my sign.sign. No, she can't have no mattress. No, she can't have no spoon.             See if she throwed her food yet.                                                           No, she can't have no more.             I am only about thirty-four minutes from home. That's hard.  George, field line seated on a bag of peas on a flatbed             My auntie works here, and two of my cousins. If I get in trouble, get a write-up, my mama knows before supper. George             My name is Patricia, but my real name is Zabonia, she spoke softly. Some have their baby and are brought back on the bus the next day and act like it doesn't bother them a bit. Some cry all the way. And for days. guard                                                                                           That's hard.                                                                                           I don't go there.             My mama was fifteen when she had me. That's common.                                                                           in the country.                                                       Some can learn, and will be okay. Some could stay in the class forever and not learn. S   when she was a little girl was struck in the head with a machete, and I don't think she'll learn much more... She is so sweet. You wouldn't believe she had did all the things they sayso       she did.                                                      Don't ask. My mug shot totally turned me against being photographed.                                                       I miss the moon. I miss silverware, with a knife,                                                       and maybe even something to cut with it.                                                       I miss a bathtub.                                                       And a toilet. With a lid. And a handle.                                                       And a door. When Grasshopper came to Big Gola his wife was pregnant. He saw the baby once. Next when he was twenty. Now he's inside. In Texas. Second time. But he's short now. He'll get out soon.                                                                                           That's hard.                                                                                           I don't go there.                                                       I miss driving. We're both here because of love. Zabonia of herself and her best      friend                                                       I am highly hypnotizable. I would wash that man's feet and drink the water.                                                                                          

Art what do the art suppressors care about art they jump on bandwagons wallow in press clips & stink up the planet with their pornographic oppression Art what do they care about art they go from being contemporary baby kissers to old time corrupt politicians to self-appointed censorship clerks who won't support art but will support war poverty lung cancer racism colonialism and toxic sludge that's their morality that's their religious conviction that's their protection of the public & contribution to family entertainment what do they care about art

young Jesse Washington                                     even though you     on the wooden stick cross of fire bitten charred cut & burned        5 minute jury April 15, 1916    Waco, Texas shackled & dragged   lynched                                                 You live on                                                                   Trayvon Martin face down red juice on the lawn clutching candy rushing home the hoodie the hoodie the prowler shooter said upside down shredded night                                                                                 because of you     you   we march touch hands lean back leap forth against the melancholy face of tanks & militia    we move                                                               walk become we become           somehow                   Eric Garner we scribble your name sip your breath    now                our breath cannot be choked off our skin cannot be flamed      totality                                       cannot be cut off each wrist each bone cannot be chained to the abyss                gnashing levers & polished                                    killer sheets of steel we are remarkably loud not masked                 rough river colors that cannot be threaded back   hear us Freddie Gray here                                         with us                                             Jesse Washington Trayvon Martin Michel Brown the Black Body holy     Eric Garner  all breath Holy we weep & sing as we write                              as we mobilize & march                                   under the jubilant solar face  

1. Thousands of fish killed after Pemex spill in el R o Salado and everyone runs out to buy more bottled water. Here, our river kills more crossers than the sun, than the singular   heat of Arizona, than the ranchlands near the Falfurrias checkpoint. It's hard to imagine an endangered river with that much water, especially in summer and with the Falcon Reservoir   in drought, though it only takes inches to drown. Sometimes, further west, there's too little river to paddle in Boquillas Canyon where there are no steel-column walls   except the limestone canyon's drop and where a puma might push-wade across, or in El Paso, where double-fenced muros sparkle and blind with bullfight ring lights, the ring the concrete river mold, and above   a Ju rez mountain urgesLa Biblia es La Verdad Leela.La Biblia es La VerdadLeela.   2. Today at the vigil, the native singer said we are all connected by water, la sangre de vida.   Today, our vigil signs proclaimed McAllen is not Murrieta.#iamborderless. Derechos#iamborderless. DerechosInmigrantes=DerechosInmigrantes=DerechosHumanos. Bienvenidos ni os.Humanos. Bienvenidos ni os.We stand with refugee children.We stand with refugee children.We are all human. BienvenidosWe are all human. Bienvenidosa los Estados Unidos.a los Estados Unidos.   And the songs we sang the copal that burned and the rose petals spread en los cuatro puntos were for the children and women and men. Songs   for the Guatemalan boy with an Elvis belt buckle and Angry Birds jeans with zippers on back pockets who was found shirtless in La Joya, one mile from the river. The worn jeans   that helped identify his body in the news more times than a photo of him while alive. (I never knew why the birds are angry. My mother said someone stole their eggs.)   The Tejas sun took a boy I do not know, a young man who wanted to reach Chicago, his brother's number etched in his belt, his mother's pleas not to leave in white rosary beads   he carried. The sun in Tejas stopped a boy the river held. Detention centers filled, churches offer showers and fresh clothes. Water and a covered porch may have waited at a stranger's house   or in a patrol truck had his body not collapsed. Half of our bodies are made of water, and we can't sponge rivers through skin and release them again like rain clouds. Today   at the vigil the native singer sang we are all connected by water, la sangre de vida.

   1 1 An Ireland, as of chalk, the sky standing in for the sea, the beach a reach of blue, the vineyards  green scooped out in cirque, in cove, a subtlety of air laps the eyes, abob like barques come from afar, and the viator standing there, poised to dis- embark, the undercurrent of air escaping him, tossed to & fro, gaze wrenched from its angle of purchase upon the world, capsized, head now careened against the suddenness of rock, eyes whiplashed into new prospects, he drowns in fire, enflamed, fine silk aquiver at the singe of brazier, he burns: would Hell be as blue, or the sun the obverse of God?   2 2 Now at Laon, the Lugdunum of the North, deposited on this citadel of chalk, white arx, formerarx temple of Lug, the light- god of the Gauls, & he, this Celt from Hibernia, setting foot on this podium, this puy, this platform afloat at cloud & wind height, blown in from the septentrion, breathes in the quintessence of rains, alevel the briar s pinks, zone where water, at first cold snap, turns to snow. Fallen from fire. Autumn s pure light whitens the mount, the tufa reverberating the radiance of a Cyclades isle, here mis- placed, high above these plains, by some error in translation.   3 3 At Lindisfarne, let us suppose   even if Alcuin s letters to the island s monks exhorting them to combat the Viking may be evidence to the contrary   that he studied Greek, that Charles the Bald, offshoot of the Pippinids, summoned him here to Laon to translate Dionysus. Between the king s vineyards & the blue sky, a whisper of the North Sea in the channel of  le Sainte when the seals bark at ebb tide, Johannes the Hibernian cocks an ear despite finding his coracle of Latin too frail a craft to explore the peninsulas of Greek, & carries with him the long-lapping waves of Scotland & seaweed s tang where kingfisher nests beside nugget of amber.   4 4 That which lies out of reach taking the shape of this white & shadowy rock on which he is now beached & whose slope he now climbs, blind beneath the sun, fallen from the same height he ascends, would Satan be extending him his welcome with the same dark radiance of stone between his eyes & the same fine peppering of pinks that spice his senses on either side of the stairs, against this, what whiteness, what candor? The sky s rarified air, there to calculate the distances between the things he climbs or descends, the divisions of the world now extended, now illuminated between the lines, the borders of the intangible now flaring up with darkness, the granular opacities now brightening, the sun biting into the margins of the real, the image dying.   5 5 Denys, foundation of all cathedrals to come, mentor of naves, stained glass rosettes, of all the gossamer shadow spiderwebbing the light from the East as it rises, Lord of Ionia, oriental Ionas, Denys, Dionysos, your Greek sailing the great hill of Lugdunum, your darkness raining down its alphas, its Alphei, the dawn uncorking the fizz of its dations. John Scotus comments, his violet ink relighting, igniting the world according to Plato, filtering the grit of the flower through the sieve of the eye, the bran, the curds of light, sifting out the clots of theology, in this shadowy cave, the locals burning every log in sight, hoc lignum,hoc lignum a bonfire of stones held in common, lapis iste.lapis iste   6 6 And if some hick might askQuomodo omnia, quae sunt,Quomodo omnia, quae sunt, lumina sunt? the master picks up a stone, a rock from the Laon vineyard, applies his know-how to the refractory matter at hand, crumbles it, cake of honey humming with the blue of the ambient sky, the clarity, the tang, the silky feel of the stone giving rise to the precise & exact idea whose line cuts against another idea, steps hewn, crossing over into each other, pebble giving rise to temple, tensile, acts of attention & hierarchy of effects, blueprints polished to perfection, prayer welcomed into its breast by the increase of the volume of silence springing from ribbed ogives, from angles.   7 7 He holds Ireland in his hand like Carolus Magnus the Apple of Empire surmounted by the Cross. To distance oneself from idolatry means, first & foremost, to gather together the Earth in godly fashion, to harden its pit, its core, its blindness to the sun, its heart of darkness according to Denys, then to hurl this handful of earth skywards, so that it take flight & light like a ball of sun, cormorant, black oriflamme, that it crackle chalky winey in the blue veins of Ouranos, welcomed intoOuranos the sack of the crystal vault like a ripe cherry fallen from its tree in June among the rungs of the ladder, if hurled from this great a distance Earth is no more than a fruit s seed in the scrumptious season of God.   8 8 In the treading vats of Laon, the light squirts out from underfoot, the Greek hill bleeds a wine lighter & clearer than the juice of Santorini, the vat tips over, the blue gushes out, the sheer flood of the world saves it from being swallowed up, God has created things as numerous as his glory, hilaritas! Night overtakeshilaritas joy on the hill, the winter of all things recedes into God, from whom they so luminously proceed, & we philosophers who make our way by foot, following the path of photodosia, we reachphotodosia the degrees of the world inasmuch as we take pleasure in its ascent, Earth in one hand, knees in Earth, pilgrimage of humility, voyage of hilarity to the Mount of Laon, Mountain of Time.   Translated from the FrenchTranslated from the FrenchTranslated from the FrenchTranslated from the French

The famous Polish poet calls Simone de Beauvoir a Nazi hag but to me she will always be her famous book, the one with the Matisse paper cut on the cover, a sad blue nude I took into the woods. Where we college girls went to coax the big picture from her, as if she could tell us how to use all the strange blades on our Swiss Army knives  the firewood we arranged in either log cabin or tepee, a little house built to be burned down. Which could be a metaphor: Simone as the wind puffing the damp flames, a cloud with a mouth that became obsolete once we started using gasoline. Still, she gave me one lesson that sticks, which is: do not take a paperback camping in the rain or it may swell to many times its original size, and if you start with a big book you ll end up with a cinderblock. In that vein I pictured Simone as huge until (much later) I read that her size was near-midget  imagine, if we took Gertrude Stein, we d be there still, trying to build some kind of travois to drag her body out. The other thing I remember, a word, immanence immanence  meaning, you get stuck with the cooking and laundry while the man gets to hit on all your friends in Paris. Sure you can put the wet book in the oven and try baking it like a cake. But the seam will stay soggy even when the pages rise, ruffled like French pastry. As far as laundry goes, it s best I steer clear, what with my tendency to forget the tissues wadded in my sleeves. What happens is I think I m being so careful, and everything still comes out like the clearing where we woke. Covered in flakes that were then the real thing: snow. Which sounds more la-di-da in French. But then the sun came up and all la neige vanishedla neige  like those chapters we grew bored with and had skipped.  

        I am as guilty as many. No one speaks of David Ignatow anymore. No one speaks of  your lonesome time in the New York boonies, those outer reaches of Jamaica, where the Z & J Lines go no more. No one speaks of your sparsely furnished rooms, the low-slung Danish sofa where you sit and muse and daydream out the grimed window on rainy days. Even in the warmth of spring, there is no spring. You don t go out much, I would imagine. I imagine much for the both of us. All those darknesses at noon. Those woodlands filled with songbirds twittering. Even scribblings on the morning TimesTimes are but a momentary respite. Words we ve been blessed with, still blessed, even in our nightly dreams unfinished. Where art thou now, dear David? Where is the love for my desperation that I may fight your fears?

When I was younger, I watched the world blend           on PBS. The painter with the Jewfro hypnotized me.Jewfro    With a thumb hooked through the palette,           he painted forward from the base coat like a god might use a blueprint.           Behind the image is always the word: light. On top came tiny crisscross strokes           of phthalo blue. A rapturous pinwheel of words   unveiled sky. Two sharp strokes of titanium white           slashed with gray from the master's knife became wings, gulls taking flight. I begged for nothing           but paints that summer. Already equipped -with an afro, I sat before the paper and the cakes of color           and tried to figure out the path to cerulean, the wrist twist to evergreens and the motion           for clouds. The oversaturated paper dried and cracked   with the fine lines of lightning. The worlds he reproduced           might as well have been Asgard or Olympus. How I longed for a visit. Might he come           armed with a fan brush and dressed in a button down?   To be soothed by his voice and taken,           lured from the dining-room table and shown   the suburb's majesty. Look son, he might say,           at the pile of autumn leaves, the shade   on that forest-green trash bag. Using his two-inch brush           he'd blend the prefab homes on the hill until they seemed mysterious, folded hues           of Prussian blue, Van Dyke brown, and a blaze of alizarin crimson.  

Covet not the sun its honorarium nor authorize the stars their grants to write. The sojournors spotted a forest adrift with language, but couldn't make sense of it. The woods at odds with the usual channels and those neighboring mountains didn't look like pyramids, no matter the scale. Read this part as if the sum of lilac mattered to you. For love of someone else's vortex, toss the luminaries aside. In lieu of flowers, please donate and in exchange for your sympathy I'll give you edits on the level of the line. Poems are to war as are ghosts to the proverbial orchard.  Headstones offer us nothing but an end to syntax. Microsoft  Word inverts the sea. I read your manuscript. Reader, I married it. I fear for the estuaries. They are so small this time of year.

This is the sound of the bell. It rings, full of brass and the end it brings: once for the children, once for the child who sits alone. His eyes hurt and mild, he waits, holding his things. Time should hold no meaning for him yet. You don t learn how to play; you forget. But he knows a while well, and longs for the clang of the bell. A bell is a room of nothing. No, a dome with a hidden swing    a will, a sway, a tone, a peal, the beginning of song. The wild crowd nears, passes, laughing. Here is the sound of the bell.

I put an animal on an animal which I put onto the animal I had already stacked on top of my first animal and stood back to appraise my work only it looked much too short despite the number of animals I had gathered, and I felt tired and silly and disappointed, slumping to my knees, rocking back onto my bum, then lying down to stare into the hoary sky until my eyeballs softened and I was forced by the consistent light to close them and listen to the animals taking a surprisingly long time to disorganize themselves.

When life seems gray And short of fizz It seems that way Because it is.  

        It will be a while before recollections in tranquility set in, as time in its adversary mode of darker days ticks on transfixing you in newsprint. It will be a while before those sudden winds descend upon the Po. A while before the laughter echoes in the dark; before the sounds of seagulls and accordions, harmonicas mix in those parting shots of long-forgotten flicks with names like La notte brava, I Pugni in tasca, L oro di Napoli.La notte brava, I Pugni in tasca, L oro di Napoli Your show-offy had intelligence; not the  unconscious  your friend Calvino claims you lacked. Ha-ha. It will be a while before the tranquility comes round again. A while before you re able to get up and move about; stare out from your Swallow s Nest on those dappled waters of Salerno s Gulf, almost fable-like.  Didn t it go by awfully fast?  your buddy Howard once sweetly asked. It will be a while and sometimes more and not your last.

An owl once perched in my tree at night (when most birds cannot see). But when the sun rose, he was found by some crows, and their caws caused the owl to flee.

Dying only mother s hands continue undying, blading into air, impersonal, forced, curving it down   drought incessant rain revolution and the organs shutting down but not these extremities, here since I first opened my first eyes first day and there they were, delicate, pointing, will not back off, cannot be remembered. Mother, dying   mother not wanting to die   mother scared awakening each night thinking she s dead   crying out   mother not remembering who I am as I run in   who am I   mother we must take away the phone because who will you call next   now saying I dreamt I have to get this dress on, if I get this dress on I will not die   mother who cannot get the dress on because of broken hip and broken arm and tubes and coils and pan and everywhere pain, wandering delirium, in the fetid shadow- world   geotrauma   trans- natural   what is this message you have been scribbling all your life to me, what is this you drag again today into non-being. Draw it. The me who is not here. Who is the ghost in this room. What am I that is now drawn. Where are we heading. Into what do you throw me with your quick eye   up onto me then down onto the blank of the page. You rip the face off. I see my elbow there where now you bend it with the pen, you fill it in, you slough it off me onto more just-now making of more future. You look back up, you take my strangeness from me, you machine me, you hatch me in. To make what, mother, here in this eternity this second this million years where I watch as each thing is seen and cancelled-out and re- produced   multiplying aspects of light in the morning air   the fingers dipping frantic into the bag of pens, pencils, then here they are   the images   and the hands move   they are making a line now, it is our world, it horizons, we ghost, we sleepwalk, everything around us is leveled, canceled, we background, we are barely remains, we remain, but for what, the fingers are deepening curling, bringing it round, the mind does not   I don t think   know this but the fingers, oh, for all my life scribbling open the unseen, done with mere things, not interested in appraisal, just seizure   what is meant by seizure   all energy, business- serious, about direction, tracing things that dissolve from thingness into in-betweens   here firm lines, here powdery lift off   hunger, fear   the study begins   all is not lost   the thought a few seconds wide   the perusal having gone from here to here, aggregates, thicket, this spot could be where we came in, or where we are saved, could be a mistake, looks across room through me, me not here then, me trying to rise in the beam, nothing I do will make it happen, rock-face, work that excludes everything that is not itself, all urge in the process of becoming all effect, how can I touch that hand like snow moving, when is it time again as here there is no time, or time has been loaded but not cocked, so is held in reserve, all wound up, I was also made but not like this, I look for reluctance, expectation, but those are not the temperatures   if only I could be in the scene   my time is not passing   whose is the time that is passing   the hands rushing across the paper, cloudy with a sun outside also rushing scribbling   wisdom turning itself away from wisdom to be   what   a thing that would gold-up but cannot, a patch of blue outside suddenly like the cessation of language when lips cease to move   sun   self- pronouncing   I want this to not be my writing of it, want my hands not to be here also, mingling with hers who will not take my hand ever into hers, no matter how late we are, no matter that we have to run so fast through all these people and I need the hand, somewhere a radiant clearing, are we heading for it, head down towards the wide page, hand full of high feeling, cannot tell if it takes or gives, cannot tell what it is that is generating the line, it comes from the long fingers but is not them, all is being spent, the feeling that all   all that we need or have   would be spent for this next thing this capture, actually loud though all you can hear is the small scratching, and I feel dusk approaching though it is still early afternoon, just slipping, no one here to see this but me, told loud in silence by arcs, contours, swell of wind, billowing, fluent   ink chalk charcoal   sweeps, spirals, the river that goes nowhere, that has survived the astonishments and will never venture close to that heat again, is cool here, looking up at what, looking back down, how is it possible the world still exists, as it begins to take form there, in the not being, there is once then there is the big vocabulary, loosed, like a jay s song thrown down when the bird goes away, cold mornings, hauling dawn away with it, leaving grackle and crow in sun   they have known what to find in the unmade undrawn unseen unmarked and dragged it into here   that it be visible. Dying only mother s hands continue undying, blading into air, impersonal, forced, curving it down   drought incessant rain revolution and the organs shutting down but not these extremities, here since I first opened my first eyes first day and there they were, delicate, pointing, will not back off, cannot be remembered. Mother, dying   mother not wanting to die   mother scared awakening each night thinking she s dead   crying out   mother not remembering who I am as I run in   who am I   mother we must take away the phone because who will you call next   now saying I dreamt I have to get this dress on, if I get this dress on I will not die   mother who cannot get the dress on because of broken hip and broken arm and tubes and coils and pan and everywhere pain, wandering delirium, in the fetid shadow- world   geotrauma   trans- natural   what is this message you have been scribbling all your life to me, what is this you drag again today into non-being. Draw it. The me who is not here. Who is the ghost in this room. What am I that is now drawn. Where are we heading. Into what do you throw me with your quick eye   up onto me then down onto the blank of the page. You rip the face off. I see my elbow there where now you bend it with the pen, you fill it in, you slough it off me onto more just-now making of more future. You look back up, you take my strangeness from me, you machine me, you hatch me in. To make what, mother, here in this eternity this second this million years where I watch as each thing is seen and cancelled-out and re- produced   multiplying aspects of light in the morning air   the fingers dipping frantic into the bag of pens, pencils, then here they are   the images   and the hands move   they are making a line now, it is our world, it horizons, we ghost, we sleepwalk, everything around us is leveled, canceled, we background, we are barely remains, we remain, but for what, the fingers are deepening curling, bringing it round, the mind does not   I don t think   know this but the fingers, oh, for all my life scribbling open the unseen, done with mere things, not interested in appraisal, just seizure   what is meant by seizure   all energy, business- serious, about direction, tracing things that dissolve from thingness into in-betweens   here firm lines, here powdery lift off   hunger, fear   the study begins   all is not lost   the thought a few seconds wide   the perusal having gone from here to here, aggregates, thicket, this spot could be where we came in, or where we are saved, could be a mistake, looks across room through me, me not here then, me trying to rise in the beam, nothing I do will make it happen, rock-face, work that excludes everything that is not itself, all urge in the process of becoming all effect, how can I touch that hand like snow moving, when is it time again as here there is no time, or time has been loaded but not cocked, so is held in reserve, all wound up, I was also made but not like this, I look for reluctance, expectation, but those are not the temperatures   if only I could be in the scene   my time is not passing   whose is the time that is passing   the hands rushing across the paper, cloudy with a sun outside also rushing scribbling   wisdom turning itself away from wisdom to be   what   a thing that would gold-up but cannot, a patch of blue outside suddenly like the cessation of language when lips cease to move   sun   self- pronouncing   I want this to not be my writing of it, want my hands not to be here also, mingling with hers who will not take my hand ever into hers, no matter how late we are, no matter that we have to run so fast through all these people and I need the hand, somewhere a radiant clearing, are we heading for it, head down towards the wide page, hand full of high feeling, cannot tell if it takes or gives, cannot tell what it is that is generating the line, it comes from the long fingers but is not them, all is being spent, the feeling that all   all that we need or have   would be spent for this next thing this capture, actually loud though all you can hear is the small scratching, and I feel dusk approaching though it is still early afternoon, just slipping, no one here to see this but me, told loud in silence by arcs, contours, swell of wind, billowing, fluent   ink chalk charcoal   sweeps, spirals, the river that goes nowhere, that has survived the astonishments and will never venture close to that heat again, is cool here, looking up at what, looking back down, how is it possible the world still exists, as it begins to take form there, in the not being, there is once then there is the big vocabulary, loosed, like a jay s song thrown down when the bird goes away, cold mornings, hauling dawn away with it, leaving grackle and crow in sun   they have known what to find in the unmade undrawn unseen unmarked and dragged it into here   that it be visible. undying, blading into air, impersonal, forced, curving it down   drought incessant rain revolution and the organs shutting down but not these extremities, here since I first opened my first eyes first day and there they were, delicate, pointing, will not back off, cannot be remembered. Mother, dying   mother not wanting to die   mother scared awakening each night thinking she s dead   crying out   mother not remembering who I am as I run in   who am I   mother we must take away the phone because who will you call next   now saying I dreamt I have to get this dress on, if I get this dress on I will not die   mother who cannot get the dress on because of broken hip and broken arm and tubes and coils and pan and everywhere pain, wandering delirium, in the fetid shadow- world   geotrauma   trans- natural   what is this message you have been scribbling all your life to me, what is this you drag again today into non-being. Draw it. The me who is not here. Who is theme ghost in this room. What am I that is now drawn. Where are we heading. Into what do you throw me with your quick eye   up onto me then down onto the blank of the page. You rip the face off. I see my elbow there where now you bend it with the pen, you fill it in, you slough it off me onto more just-now making of more future. You look back up, you take my strangeness from me, you machine me, you hatch me in. To make what, mother, here in this eternity this second this million years where I watch as each thing is seen and cancelled-out and re- produced   multiplying aspects of light in the morning air   the fingers dipping frantic into the bag of pens, pencils, then here they are   the images   and the hands move   they are making a line now, it is our world, it horizons, we ghost, we sleepwalk, everything around us is leveled, canceled, we background, we are barely remains, we remain, but for what, the fingers are deepening curling, bringing it round, the mind does not   I don t think   know this but the fingers, oh, for all my life scribbling open the unseen, done with mere things, not interested in appraisal, just seizure   what is meant by seizure   all energy, business- serious, about direction, tracing things that dissolve from thingness into in-betweens   here firm lines, here powdery lift off   hunger, fear   the study begins   all is not lost   the thought a few seconds wide   the perusal having gone from here to here, aggregates, thicket, this spot could be where we came in, or where we are saved, could be a mistake, looks across room through me, me not here then, me trying to rise in the beam, nothing I do will make it happen, rock-face, work that excludes everything that is not itself, all urge in the process of becoming all effect, how can I touch that hand like snow moving, when is it time again as here there is no time, or time has been loaded but not cocked, so is held in reserve, all wound up, I was also made but not like this, I look for reluctance, expectation, but those are not the temperatures   if only I could be in the scene   my time is not passing   whose is the time that is passing   the hands rushing across the paper, cloudy with a sun outside also rushing scribbling   wisdom turning itself away from wisdom to be   what   a thing that would gold-up but cannot, a patch of blue outside suddenly like the cessation of language when lips cease to move   sun   self- pronouncing   I want this to not be my writing of it, want my hands not to be here also, mingling with hers who will not take my hand ever into hers, no matter how late we are, no matter that we have to run so fast through all these people and I need the hand, somewhere a radiant clearing, are we heading for it, head down towards the wide page, hand full of high feeling, cannot tell if it takes or gives, cannot tell what it is that is generating the line, it comes from the long fingers but is not them, all is being spent, the feeling that all   all that we need or have   would be spent for this next thing this capture, actually loud though all you can hear is the small scratching, and I feel dusk approaching though it is still early afternoon, just slipping, no one here to see this but me, told loud in silence by arcs, contours, swell of wind, billowing, fluent   ink chalk charcoal   sweeps, spirals, the river that goes nowhere, that has survived the astonishments and will never venture close to that heat again, is cool here, looking up at what, looking back down, how is it possible the world still exists, as it begins to take form there, in the not being, there is once then there is theonce big vocabulary, loosed, like a jay s song thrown down when the bird goes away, cold mornings, hauling dawn away with it, leaving grackle and crow in sun   they have known what to find in the unmade undrawn unseen unmarked and dragged it into here   that it be visible.

               Let s say I m Captain Cook, setting sail to drift until currents push me into a certain lane, certain highway with its humpbacked traffic bobbing along.                  My young aren t strapped in the back flinging Cheerios into the crevices like a game of darts but moored in the house with my patient wife so I can seek my destiny here    And I have no destination, not the Friendly Center or aquarium I journey only to find a usable route.usable route.                  I m stewing the bones a fourth time to leach any last savor for my broth                 not gumming pirate birthday cake with seafoam-colored frosting, nor placing my order at the drive-thru (no, not a Frosty, not a McRib)                     Place-names are still to be scrawled, new-minted to mark this passage, its weather and bits of luck.   The usable route s a velvet highway I ll trace to parchment a new day, a new world,   not the GPS lady recalculating                   These words held in my mouth,                these words a way to inscribe we are not lostwe are not lost in a vast expanse of lostness.  

Toggle me up on one last vanity flight half drunk on a screw-top frizzante.frizzante It takes a hell of a lot more to get me here than it did when I had beauty, boys when bedding me was the easy way to know me. Don t tuck me in so tight. I m not your grandma. This rough blanket its green red yellow indigo stripes I traded for a perfectly warm beaver pelt. Fly me once more over my disloyal youth and its hangdog slavering over men whom age has de-sexed right along with me. They broadcast impotent outrage from aluminum tablets. I collect speculums with Bakelite handles arranging them by size though it no longer matters.



Owl small be enough The child for all his feathers was a cold. Oh wow the owl. The poem the vowels The owl, look its vowels That branch for you Owl, are you an armature vector And a large step for mankind? Owl astronaut burgeoning owl is a gift You give to me give to you Terrible other things happen. We stay on our branch. A hundred eyes Two will do

When in the dumps, I hate the things    That ordinarily I love. I loathe the lark that blindly sings;    I hate the bland, blue sky above. The crocus, sneering on the lawn,    Forsythia about to bloom  I'd like to see them dead and gone,    Instead of filling life with gloom. But most of all, I do not care,    While I am droning in my hive, To hear vivacious chums declare    How great it is to be alive.

Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day, And make me travel forth without my cloak, To let base clouds o ertake me in my way, Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?  Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break, To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face, For no man well of such a salve can speak That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace: Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief; Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss: The offender s sorrow lends but weak relief To him that bears the strong offence s cross.    Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,    And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.      

        Stefan Zweig, come back, come back. Do not be afraid. Do not look the other way, but on all sides. Come take the road with me into those dark woods where eerie sounds of nature coalesce, where fledglings kiss you on the head and talk to you. Come fly with me, come be my friend in those darkest hours, in those darkest woods where even dreams are not permitted, but they move in nonetheless, because their darkest hours share with yours and mine to light the light, where our angels lead us on with whisperings . . .                                                                                                and they look on. Stefan, it s safe now. Come hold my hand. We circle home. The light is in the window. The dance is picking up. The dance is done. Can t you feel it now? Can t you . . . can t you . . . ?

If they'd had writing in time, Cuba could have been Crete, watery source of the Minoans and thus the Greeks. What's lost? A possible us growing like new foliage out of stony ground, emerging? Last voice, first, a whole world calling  awful, inaudible into the unstoppable loud (roaring!) into the unstoppable loud (roaring!) hurricane-force sea wind.

        I would imagine underneath those warming bear hugs was a kinda kind of soul as your many poems attest. Those summer breezes. Those many hazy sunsets nature s voices echoing afar. A life continually fulfilled bordering on the empty and those inexplicable tragedies, those bad timings unreconciled, then reconciled with time. You had no answer that would satisfy your curiosity and the why, the wherewithal just round the bend.why The morning mists descending in an angled quietude. A birdcall here and there. A rising wind unfurled and furling at the top-most branches of a conifer. Those wetlands mysterioso. A last-known address unknown at last.

Wandering off under those astrological signs charted just for you, my quiet trekker all those houses & planets so perfectly straight-faced but still baffling at birth don't think badly of me when I'm dead & you've gone deep into the distance of love tangles, moneyed interests, & old-fashioned commutes into life in other words I did what I could for you, knowing it might not be enough I see now that I can't save you from suffering, & trying to hurts if I'm not kind. Tho I still want your life to be untroubled, & am afraid for you, a fear made out of my own fear of a future I can't control  the world so often a human heart that eats itself  places like New Orleans the Swat Valley Fukushima  the names of those remote destinations for film crews and symposium panels are places people die native to those regions & out to kill or defend life from itself there is so much misery there that refuses to call itself misery & that sees itself instead as the unimpeachable power of a righteous day. And there are criminals & dunces elsewhere  hideous partyline whips, Saxon in outlook and proud of it there are the bodysnatched and the inane candy-stripers & the greedy and the martini narcissists high on the rising year  but let's take the long view: these are not your true companions, & out of my reach your life will make itself in struggle & love perhaps dependent on the strength that will come if I only let go when you step out the door as hazel-eyed now as always & maybe more so this morning in slate-gray Gore-Tex.

The Seneca carry stories in satchels. They are made of  pounded corn and a grandmother s throat. The right boy will approach the dampness of a forest with a sling, a modest twining wreath for the bodies of  birds. A liquid eye. When ruffed from leaves, the breath of  flight is dissolute. What else, the moment of  weightlessness before a great plunge? In a lost place, a stone will find the boy. Give me your birds, she will say, and I will tell you a story. A stone, too, admits hunger. The boy is willing. Loses all his beaks. What necklace will his grandmother make now. The sun has given the stone a mouth. With it, she sings of what has been lost. She sings and sings and sings. The boy listens, forgets, remembers. Becomes distracted. The necklace will be heavy, impossible to wear.

A snail sank   grand in puss and rime, on three coils (equals one tea-wheel) white. The wheel brings the bill, the bill   bald. Everyone goes in for the table, the tablecloth is of water. One says huh   one morning high on a grape I dropped off   a dunce    and exacted my height, and rightly so: it is a height I won t have made alone. It is a height erring on all sides. The bride slip n slides on her back to us   then on her head (a ball-point pen), quicksand in her hair. A man beside her, his mouth is like a dark arch for her. My mouth is death to you! In this new rhythm how can I say, how can I thank you, for I feel a blessing running through my tale now, it shines    intestines   that I will can.

With el r o grande~bravo                  in our face This river                  at its mouth                  at its source With you at its source                  its sources With you at the snow                  the evergreens The million earth holes                  of water emerging                  emerald Snakes, Gloria Anzald a's                  grave With this river                  on our face Neon green anole                  swells its throat                  pink-white El r o bravo~                  grande on its face Ocelots hunt                  under six                  foot shrub                  canopies With the drive                  of the Continental Divide                  with the pull                  of tributaries                  in their limbs Chicharras                  whining in the shade                  rivers                  in their timbals Females laying eggs                  in branches   The young border patrol officer                  flashes sirens daily                  lifts his gun                  with the river                  on his face Upriver, Chihuahua                  desert ancestors'                  adobe bricks stand up                  crumble down With el r o grande~bravo                  on our face You said you loved                  the river                  on my face You said headwaters                  the source                  el r o grande el r o grande                  rises from its sourcerises                   saw the lines around                  our mouths                  saw adobe-brick lines                  exposed Monsoon season                  granizo pelting                  the facades                  at its source                  in my mouth                  adobe mud                  bricks in my mouth                  the earth                  holes, the sources                  the snow                  avalanches                  granizo                  R o Conchos de M xico                  grandmothers'                  Cueva de la Olla                  at our face                  Tarahumara                  Rar muri Tidal confluences                  in our face Some crossed                  with nuns during la                  revoluci n el r o bravo~grande                  on their face Relatives                  disappear                  die detained                  with tributaries                  of many rivers on their face In Ciudad Ju rez, a mother hoped                  her missing daughter                  married a rich American                  with the river far away Constant helicopters finding heat                  with the river as the source To the west, crossers lift the tortilla                  curtain Walk deserts without water                  on their face Guanajuato ancestors crossed through Cali                  with mirages                  in their face While I shower daily with el valle river water on my face Thank you and kiss you daily Julia de Burgos with el R o Grande de Lo za Puerto Rico in your face Julia I can now speak of hurricanes and being a dog at someone's feet I remember El Paso's Inca doves                  burrowing owls in the morning                  barn owls in El Valle's cemeteries                  great horned owl and mockingbirds                  Harris hawks and pauraques vecinos carrying signs                  two communities                  " No al muro!" " Segundo Barrio no se vende!"                  with the river on their face A daughter and mother want their ashes                  scattered                  at Boca Chica                  the river's mouth                  the end, the start                  another source                  crabs collapsing                  into bullets bursting out of holes                  carrizo, bugambilia                  seeds      petals      paper                  rose                  raspas                  the mouth                  the eddies                  the tributaries                  the flow                  R o Conchos de M xico                  the snow                  granizo                  the pelts                  the sources                  rising The confluence of people and god                  tortugas                  ribbon snakes in Roma                  pigs and piglets jumping                  from banks with the river on their face                  You can hear roosters                        crowing across                              the water in Miguel Alem n Hurricanes                  disturb unsettled graves with the river in our face You said you don't want archaic chains                  lowering you loudly with obvious labor six feet in You want to hear the cool chachalacas                  with the river on their legs                        flapping                              from  bano to  bano                  el chal n                  the ropes                  the pull                  over green                  water                  under                  blue sky                  to D az Ordaz I want to hear parrots                  sabal palms                  try again With the river on our face                  I want no medicine                  no ambition                  with the river in my face I used to love you                  with the river in my face I stil love you                  when the river's on my face I made a foot-deep grave                  with the river on my face I loved other rivers                  with el r o grande~bravo on my face I want to oxbox lake                  in this place where children stil speak and lose                                   multiple tongues                  in this place where we still lose and grow                                   forked tongues                  this place where white herons hunt and drink in the resacas                  this place with el r o grande~bravo                                   in its pipes                                   in its lungs                                   in our face

      

When those are the walkative stars That talked to the immediate prisoners themselves When those are the talkative stars That walked along the narrow sledge pathways Yet those are lines to another star That were to have been led for changelings Around a dark dreambox of another kind That houses our more talkative stars

WHEREAS a string-bean blue-eyed man leans back into a swig of beer work-weary lips at the dark bottle keeping cool in short sleeves and khakis he enters the discussion;
Whereas his wrist loose at the bottleneck to come across as candid  Well at least there was an Apology that s all I can say  he offers to the circle each of them scholarly;
Whereas under starlight the fireflies wink across East Coast grass and me I sit there painful in my silence glued to a bench in the midst of the American casual;
Whereas a subtle electricity in that low purple light I felt their eyes on my face gauging a reaction and someone s discomfort leaks out in a well-stated  Hmmm ;
Whereas like a bird darting from an oncoming semi my mind races to the Apology s assertion  While the establishment of permanent European settlements in North America did stir conflict with nearby Indian tribes, peaceful and mutually beneficial interactions also took place ;
Whereas I cross my arms and raise a curled hand to my mouth as if thinking as if  taking it in I allow a static quiet then choose to stand up excusing myself  I leave them to unease;
Whereas I drive down the road replaying the get-together how the man and his beer bottle stated their piece and I reel at what I could have said or done better;
Whereas I could ve but didn t broach the subject of  genocide  the absence of this term from the Apology and its rephrasing as  conflict  for example;
Whereas since the moment had passed I accept what s done and the knife of my conscience pierces with bone-clean self-honesty;
Whereas in a stirred conflict between settlers and an Indian that night in a circle;
Whereas I struggle to confess that I didn t want to explain anything;
Whereas truthfully I wished most to kick the legs of that man s chair out from under him;
Whereas to watch him fall backward legs flailing beer stench across his chest;
Whereas I pictured it happening in cinematic slow-motion delightful;
Whereas the curled hand I raised to my mouth was a sign of indecision;
Whereas I could ve done it but I didn t;
Whereas I can admit this also took place, yes, at least;
 
at leastat leastWHEREAS we ride to the airport in a van they swivel their necks and shoulders around to speak to me sugar and lilt in their voices something like nurses their nursely kindness through my hair then engage me as comrades in a fight together. Well what we want to know one lady asks is why they don t have schools there? Her outrage empathy her furrowed brow. There are schools there I reply. Grade schools high schools colleges. But why aren t there any stores there? There are stores there. Grocery stores convenience stores trading posts whatever what-have-you I explain but it s here I recognize the break. It s here we roll along the pavement into hills of conversation we share a ride we share a country but live in alternate nations and here I must tell them what they don t know or, should I? Should I is the moment to seize and before I know it I say Well you know Native people as in tribes as in  people  living over there are people with their own nations each with its own government and flag they rise to their own national songs and sing in their own languages, even. And by there I mean here all around us I remind them. Drifting in side-glances to whirring trees through the van windows then back to me they dig in they unearth the golden question My God how come we were never taught this in our schools? The concern and furrow. But God the slowing wheels and we lurch forward in the van s downshift and brake. Together we reach a full-stop. Trapped in a helix of traffic we re late for check-in security flights our shoulders flex forward into panicked outward gazes nerves and fingers cradle our wristwatches so to answer their question now would be untimely because to really speak to it ever is, untimely. But there Comrades there there Nurses. I will remember the swing of your gold earrings. There your perfume around me as a fresh blanket. There you checked my pulse kindly. There the boundary of bedside manners;theretheretherethereShould Itherethereheretherethere thereThereThereThereWHEREAS a woman I know says she watched a news program a reporter detailed the fire a house in which five children burned perhaps their father too she doesn t recall exactly but remembers the camera on the mother s face the mother s blubbering her hiccuping and wail she leans to me she says she never knew then in those times that year this country the northern state she grew up in she was so young you see she d never seen it before nobody talked about them she means Indians she tells me and so on and so on but that moment in front of the TV she says was like opening a box left at her door opening to see the thing inside whereas to say she learned through that mother s face can you believe it and I let her finish wanting someone to say it but she hated saying it or so she said admitting how she never knew until then they could feel;WHEREAS the word whereas means it being the case that, or considering that, or while on the contrary; is a qualifying or introductory statement, a conjunction, a connector. Whereas sets the table. The cloth. The saltshakers and plates. Whereas calls me to the table because Whereas precedes and invites. I have come now. I m seated across from a Whereas smile. Under pressure of formalities, I fidget I shake my legs. I m not one for these smiles, Whereas I have spent my life in unholding. What do you mean by unholding? Whereas asks and since Whereas rarely asks, I am moved to respond, Whereas, I have learned to exist and exist without your formality, saltshakers, plates, cloth. Without the slightest conjunctions to connect me. Without an exchange of questions, without the courtesy of answers. This has become mine, this unholding. Whereas, with or without the setup, I can see the dish being served. Whereas let us bow our heads in prayer now, just enough to eat;whereasWhat do you mean by unholding?

The evening empty as a convex coconut split down the seam: not that it can be filled. The evening empty as a gourd that twists on an iron thread: the rough skin of the sphere. .            .          .            .           .      Not that there was a spoken word to recall the moment of seeing the short span when the clocks ceased to revolve and hands met in jest or benediction time of the vortex into which hibiscus and almond trees strayed and windows made of aluminum. The stars are suddenly remote candescent petals night throws above the yard, the beautiful things. .             .          .            .           .   The great house is a hotel and a museum of victory how some lived at the epoch of planters and governors visible in the paintings the armchairs and gilded glass articulate artifacts and floors polished by daylight in a country of green hills and water wheels and wagons and sun coming out after a rain the labor is hidden that built the house long ago, and ploughed the land to make it bear fruit  .             .          .            .           . In British poetry, gentle woodland creatures gaze at the hermit with marble eyes lit from within. A single bird defends the song. Among the pines draped with snow from the whole land only a secret footfall teases the senses awake like white breath on white canvas. Ideal forms crowd the auditorium. The sky deepens on the surface of a lake, in a cradle of stars. A coppice of isolated birch trees climbs the mountainside to touch the moon's scar, benevolent witness washed of color and fragmentary illuminating the village below.   .             .          .            .           . In New World poetry, an invisible river runs this way and that. A car(t) eases on a bumpy track over small hills and into shallows. The world is a tangle of leaves. Towards sundown a driver gets out and pushes into the forest, drawn by a noise he cannot identify: perhaps the hiss of water below. It's only the river on its way. Ideal forms crowd the auditorium things present and things past scattered beneath the poinciana. The car heads into higher country then out into space where fields suddenly lie down beneath the seer cattle pastures and agricultural lands that have always been there watched over by the great house from its hilltop, like a sentinel. .             .          .            .           . In British poetry, the forms of desire darken with the change of seasons: green leaves once they fade and turn gold and fall to earth, and make a carpet in the forest, awaiting the rain. For each season has its sonata. Silence and sound in balance belong to the decline of autumn. In winter the notes are fewer. Silence comes into its kingdom crown of the father, who departs. The world of white prepares to conquer the earth with silence.   .             .          .            .           . In British poetry, articulate hues speak as they are visible to the mind audible colors played on a piano primary sounds in an empty forest. And then above a lake, the moon in motion suspended like a dancer as the music temporarily ceases depriving her body of its rhythm. .             .          .            .           . Ideal forms crowd the auditorium. The light of day starts to fade and a mist settles in the valleys. The great house is lit from within.   .             .          .            .           . As they were, in other windows you want to see their ghosts the slaves, like black posts staggered through the fields. You want to make a picture that shows the strange overlords at intervals watch the misery of torsos laboring to plant and harvest the seas of sugar. .             .          .            .           . The green beds of sugar cane extend from here to the hills. Bright heads grazed by the light of paradise become its negative.   .             .          .            .           . In time, would the land irritate us as it must have irritated the masters the tropical caress of the air unavoidable getting up each day to see once more the rolling green hills and cattle ponds tranquil in the valleys, the horses collected at the water trough, content to stand or to walk over the grass.   A comely scene worthy of an oil painting (fruit trees dappled with sunlight). They have escaped from seasons into the monotony of a terrible beauty. (Who is speaking?) .             .          .            .           . Away from the coast the car passes through a shadowy green world of tropical syntax ragged slopes and curves.   .             .          .            .           . What then was promised by the evening lights that spangled about the hills?   .             .          .            .           . Endless tall grasses, a landscape composed of variations on a color. The after-image of elliptical forms transparent as the cry of a seagull. .             .          .            .           . A tablet of scripted exclamations: there, a poinciana with pink blossoms overhangs the road, there a scrawl of fighting tendrils, an indigo grammar of petals offering illumination to fan-shaped pristine hieroglyphs waving to greener punctuations of banana trees and mango, a tangle of writing over writing closed to further interventions. Visible palimpsest of a book without letters the tangle of leaves has no secret key and cannot be deciphered, wordless monads travelling contours of silence. .             .          .            .           . Mimesis touches the world with an imperceptible tenderness, only hardly like wind an Aeolian harp. .             .          .            .           . There is a point when the sky pivots to face the dawn, to face the dark side of personality, that of a sensible man recanting the mysteries he embraced as a youth, when the angels spoke to him and he ran towards them with arms wide open across a field, beneath the painted stars. .             .          .            .           . Say that the world is a drinking glass containing things of the life and language and say that a poet wakes up one morning thinking of capturing for the future those petals inside that glass, broken vowels. A vase of orchids stands on a kitchen table. Not that it is abstract, or a luminous symbol, nonetheless it is an algebra of forces, like the equations of space-time, which rule outside the mental universe.  As if an image should leave its mirror behind (the thing of which it is but a ghost) like bodiless speech, and yet sensuous, in the way a dream can leave its mark on the dreamer Esse est percipi, so speaketh the Law.Esse est percipi Wind begins to touch an Aeolian harp. The great house is a place of articulation word calls to other words, in transit. Compelled by the beauty of flowers the mind creates a space for other things. .             .          .            .           . (By British I mean Romantic idealist.) Warm night descends like a cloak. The whistle of tree frogs supplies a melody, and crickets invisible to the moon begin their Parliament. The birds sleep with their young. The air is otherwise still.

Inside the sandpit you are playing for your life. Your bucket and spade that smiled all day long, like family in your satchel, now work hard. Your material is sand. It weaves a universe where you are huge, the cellar behind you, eclipsed by twelve chestnut trees and their pigeon gods. On and on you burrow, into your sanctuary, devotion s priest. There are rituals to do, like counting leaves on the sky s loom. Any lapse and you tumble back into the brain s forks, rick-racking the minutes for the lock that unclicks, the coffining dark, the hooded stranger with Papa s voice, the makeshift bed.

On the way home, Klansmen handed out pamphlets on the corner. At the convenience store, taxidermied alligator heads framed red red lips, black black skin, white wild white wide eyes, and teeth grinning (gritting). Mammy, Sambo, savages and jockeys shaped cookie jars, figurines, gravy boats, piggy banks, and salt and pepper shakers. I hold evidence in the shape of entrails, two scales stuck to the side of the sink. Bodies decapitated and soaked in milk and butter. Breaded in crumbs. Tender, the results of freeing the little ones. Mount that big one there. I have lived with the reduction of noise and the number of warnings. I have lived under July s blankets and February s ill-fitting sleeves. I have lived with the proof of the Susquehanna s existence, in the shadow of the shadow of the outline of a bubble s refracted edge.

               Thirty seconds of yellow lichen.   Thirty seconds of coil and surge,                fern and froth, thirty seconds                                 of salt, rock, fog, spray.                                                                              Clouds   moving slowly to the left                   A door in a rock through which you could see                                               __   another rock,                                 laved by the weedy tide.                  Like filming breathing thirty seconds   of tidal drag, fingering                the smaller stones                                 down the black beach what color                  was that, aquamarine? Starfish spread                                   their salmon-colored hands.                                               __                    I stood and I shot them. I stood and I watched them                right after I shot them: thirty seconds of smashed sea                                 while the real sea                                   thrashed and heaved                   They were the most boring movies ever made. I wanted                                   to mount them together and press Play.                                               __                    Thirty seconds of waves colliding. Kelp                  with its open attitudes, seals                                 riding the swells, curved in a row                                   just under the water                                                     the sea,                  over and over.                                                  Before it's over.

I watch the ocean square into a turning Burn. Burning, my holes glass over. Lightning Hits the beach, melts me shut. I ve drowned Before, in the bye along a row of shored   Rocks. From the barrel chest butcher I buy Tight roasts. This year s man, his clownish dog walks me In the park until I die on his leash and domestic Night s sticky seizures. I thumb and   it   Like liking a million times. The rich own long Lighthouses to show us how away from them We are. Past waiting for the press of his chest To my back, I hobby along to the next hem s   Promise. Again I straddle the blade thinking This is the time it will fill the gash.   

            Count heads. Count the men's. Count the women's. There are five main counts in the cell or work area. 4:45 first morning count. Inmate must stand for the count. The count takes as long as it takes. Control Center knows how many should be in what area. No one moves from area A to area B without Control knowing. If i/m is stuck out for the count i/m receives a write-up. Three write-ups, and i/m goes to lockdown. Once                                  in lockdown, you will relinquish your things:                           plastic soapdish, jar of vaseline, comb or hairpick, paperback                                   Upon return to your unit the inventory officer                          will return your things:                                    soapdish, vaseline, comb, hairpick, paperback                                   Upon release you may have your possessions:                                   soapdish, vaseline, comb, pick, book                           Whereupon your True Happiness can begin                                   soapdish, vaseline, comb, hairpick, paperback                                  Upon release you may have your possessions:                                  soapdish, vaseline, comb, pick, book                          Whereupon your True Happiness can begin In the Mansion of Happiness: Whoever possesses CRUELTYCRUELTY Must be sent back to JUSTICEJUSTICE Whoever gets into IDLENESSIDLENESS Must come to POVERTYPOVERTY Whoever becomes a SABBATHBREAKERSABBATHBREAKER Must be taken to the Pillory and there remain until he loses 2 turns

The rain, in the backyard where I watch it fall, comes down at different  rates. In the center a fine discontinuous curtain   or network   falls implacably and yet gently in drops that are probably quite light; a strengthless sempiternal precipitation, an intense fraction of the atmosphere at its purest. A little distance from the walls to the right and left plunk heavier drops, one by one. Here they seem about the size of grains of wheat, the size of a pea, while elsewhere they are big as marbles. Along gutters and window frames the rain runs horizontally, while depending from the same obstacles it hangs like individually wrapped candies. Along the entire surface of a little zinc roof under my eyes it trickles in a very thin sheet, a moir  pattern formed by the varying currents created by the imperceptible bumps and undulations of the surface. From the gutter it flows with the restraint of a shallow creek until it tumbles out into a perfectly vertical net, rather imperfectly braided, all the way to the ground where it breaks and sparkles into brilliant needles.
Each of its forms has its particular allure and corresponds to a particular patter. Together they share the intensity of a complex mechanism  as precise as it is dangerous, like a steam-powered clock whose spring is wound by the force of the precipitation.
The ringing on the ground of the vertical trickles, the glug-glug of the gutters, the miniscule strikes of the gong multiply and resonate all at once in a concert without monotony, and not without a certain delicacy.
Once the spring unwinds itself certain wheels go on turning for a while, more and more slowly, until the whole mechanism comes to a stop. It all vanishes with the sun: when it finally reappears, the brilliant apparatus evaporates. It has rained.
 Translated from the FrenchTranslated from the French

1 1 Since the irrational  because I said so  start, they d had their differences: color that isn t really color, spin that isn t spin because attitude s best when it has no content. Ask a physicist what  charge  is; he ll say your question makes no sense.   2 2 Word had it that if they surrendered their feckless ways and their lives with no end, if they joined up, they would get a head, something to speak for them: The head says,  I don t want to die.  Says,  I am all alone here. 

walking up John Street thinking of you I saw a slash of sea between houses and felt   as always, no matter mood, its or mine    as though it was the source of language and language the source of itself

hangs in the closet of this small room, collar open, sleeves empty, tail wrinkled. Nothing fills the shirt but air and my faint scent. It waits, all seven buttons undone, button holes slack, the soft fabric with its square white pattern, all of it waiting for a body. It would take any body, though it knows, in its shirt way of knowing, only mine has my shape in its wrinkles, my bend in the elbows. Outside this room birds hunt for food, young leaves drink in morning sunlight, people pass on their way to breakfast. Yet here, in this closet, the blue shirt needs nothing, expects nothing, knows only its shirt knowledge, that I am now learning how to be private and patient, how to be unbuttoned, how to carry the scent of what has worn me, and to know myself by the wrinkles.

At a certain point I stopped and asked what poems I could write, which were different from the poems I wanted to write, with the wanting being proof that I couldn t write those poems, that they were impossible. What I could do was different from what I wanted. To see this was the beginning of work that could be work, not simply pursuit after pursuit that was bound to fail, yearning for qualities that were not mine and could not be mine. Aiming for a muscular logic that could be followed by a reader s mind like an old stone wall running along a landscape, I got nothing so solid or continuous. The authority I wanted dissolved always into restlessness, into a constant gathering of images whose aggregate seemed like things that had come to settle inside a glove compartment. I had no faith in my flaws, but I had a grudging faith in the particular. There was the actual stone wall, its mongrel irregular blocks harmonized into use, rich and ordinary as a soul. There was the flea that landed on my forearm one night as I sat reading. The black speck of it, then the outsize sting. The flea that is an insect, has no wings, can jump vertically seven inches and horizontally thirteen inches. The flea that looks, through the magnifier, like the villain spaceship from a science-fiction movie, that can live for years in good conditions, and lives by drinking the blood of animals and birds, in a practice that is called, by science, hematophagy.

Plows have piled a whitened range  faux mountains at the end of our street, slopes shrinking, glazed, grayed. Fog rules the day. In woolly air, shapes stir slow cars leave a trace of exhaust, careful walkers share loud intimacies. My mother's birth slides across a calendar. Like a stranger who jumps off a bus, crosses tracks and strides toward us, memory parts the sodden gloom of our winter, as though, today, only she can see where she goes and track where she's been.



My ancestors weren t hippies, cotton precluded fascination with flowers. I don t remember communes, I remember ghettos. The riots were real, not products of hallucinogens. Free love had been at Redbones since black unemployment and credit saturation.   The white women my mother cleaned for didn t notice she had changed. I guess it was a small event, a resurrected African jumping out the gap in her front teeth. I guess it looked like a cockroach; that s what she was supposed to have, not dignity.   My mother just couldn t get excited about the Beatles, those mops she swilled in ammonia everyday on their heads. Besides, she didn t work like a dog but like a woman; they aren t the same. The hair was growing long for the same reasons Pinocchio s nose did.   I can think only of a lesbian draping crepe paper chains over my head to make a black Rapunzel possible; that s how a white woman tried to lift my burdens. At the time I didn t reject her for being lesbian or white but for both burdens. That was when I didn t want Ivory soap to be what cleaned me, made me presentable to society. All the suds I d seen were white, they still are but who cares? I m more interested in how soap dwindles in my hand, under the faucet.   I m old enough to remember blocks of ice, old enough or poor enough. I remember chipping away at it, broken glass all over the floor. Later in the riots, the broken glass of looting tattled how desperate people were to keep cool.   There are roses now in my mother s yard. Sometimes she cuts them, sets them in Pepsi bottles throughout her rooms. She is, I admit, being sentimental. Looting her heart. My father who planted them is gone. That mop in the corner is his cane growing roots.  

His father told him never start writing or reading in the middle of a book. There s a title, don t go on without one. And he didn t go on without one   he had the title Private. This was life s taproot   the obedient boy began always at the beginning. Books start out with what the boy calls Beauty   the boat s still in port. The cat s alive. Pantry s packed. Even present tense has some of the grace of past tense, what with all the present tense left to go. Usually, by the first page or second, a relationship emerges between text and title. Some of the words blur on the page and the key ones glow, as does the title, and a fat red arrow with two heads connects them. Yum. It was like owning something. The way when he paid for a fine hat and put it on, he felt a circuit through the rim and top and sides, swilling gray hat blood. And he felt like his heart controlled this circuit remotely, via microchip. If a book could not service him with this truth, which was all the pleasure in the world, he would usually stop reading. He saw the end of very few books anyway    who needs two climaxes? After that intense sensation the book always changed. It was like looking at a plate of food he d half-eaten and had rendered him bloated and nauseous. Now he is on marches. Now his gun makes a nest in his arm crook with nasty red welts for straw. Now his rear leaks smelly water all day. His whole life he has balanced himself on an absurdly slender proscenium and as he continues to edge out he can t tell if it isn t maybe a gangplank. He doesn t like the switch-up. What s out there? he wonders, in what he ll call ocean for now. To his right is an alligator. But the head-ridge has no bone. It s propped up instead by fumes: rich, dark, and pungent. Far off, men are cradling cracked dolphins. Arrows of fire shoot out the blowholes. The wounds bleed silver. Perhaps they are connecting to a title in the sky. But he s not seeing any of these things. The world is mostly brown and black, and smells like a rotting fridge. What is it? What is it? Is it a hand? Is it an eye? Is it a hat? It is time.

I wake to money, and take my money slow I watched for money, lights turned low   One must have a mind of money . . . Money that is not there and the money that is   The art of money isn't hard to master . . . The money surrounds us . . .   Sweet sweet sweet sweet sweet money Money on a wet, black bough   Do not go gentle into that good money The pure products of money go crazy   Money sweeping out from us to disappear Oh Money! My Money! our fearful trip is done   I myself will die without money Money, Money, you bastard, I'm through.

The Friend wriggled out and stood, a smiling tree, his shimmering head turning left and right. A person came along and looked up and said,  Who are you?  The Friend said,  Come on, get a buzz. It s awesome!  The person said,  I don t need that,  and walked off.  Wait!  The Friend caught up and tickled him, his fingers hooking him and reeling him in. The Friend promised he would be popular. The person said,  Really?  He wasn t convinced. The Friend poured it on, slathering him until he reeled. The Friend slathered and slathered until his head bubbled. Reeling in circles, he fell down.  Hey!  The Friend tried to wake him up.  Oh no! He s dead!  He scooped up dirt, dropped the person in, and patted it down. He acted as if nothing had happened. Then came along another person. The Friend perked up and waved.Translated from the American Sign LanguageTranslated from the American Sign LanguageTranslated from the American Sign Language

Halfway between crib and cage the French language puts crate, a simple slatted box for transporting those fruits that fall ill at the least lack of air.
Built in such a way that it can be broken down effortlessly after use, it is never used twice. It is really more perishable than the deliquescing foodstuffs that it carries.
On the corners of streets that lead to the markets, it gleams like white wood without wood s vanity. Still very new, and slightly surprised to find itself in this awkward position, having been thrown into the gutter without hope of retrieval, it remains a most likable object on whose fate we will not dwell for long.
 cribcagecrateTranslated from the FrenchTranslated from the French

I lived a long time as both woman and girl it nearly killed me I don t want an ordinary moment any longer no more gestures Such as the oaks neither shake nor fidget in observation And the objects worth discussing dissipate oh how they leak Away from the creeds claiming one can get ahead of the pain By naming see how the green will change you it really will I went into the green with a vine across my back and from the mud Came the pattern before the light could enter light turned And denied us, the moss struggled toward the yellow A fine pollen came up from the world and the road made this Shape in the powder: What s wrong with right here? There s a cape behind my eyes and the body inside it wallows   Across patches of burned up grass untender and lines perpendicular To the gate I couldn t open an outrage regularly loiters Isn t that weird, how talent carries time? Nothing s resolved today and the hours are dim but vital A body in a cloak upon a road rolling sweetly through the mind Place this road in some distant future just like that foregone past And then offensively remember how women don t exist Get head of the pain the ages counsel, make plenty of money

Isn't it always the heart that wants to wash the elephant, begging the body to do it with soap and water, a ladder, hands, in tree-shade big enough for the vast savannahs of your sadness, the strangler fig of your guilt, the cratered full moon's light fueling the windy spooling memory of elephant? What if Father Quinn had said, "Of course you'll recognize your parents in heaven," instead of "Being one with God will make your mother and father pointless." That was back when I was young enough to love them absolutely though still fear for their place in heaven, imagining their souls like sponges full of something resembling street water after rain. Still my mother sent me every Saturday to confess, to wring the sins out of my small baffled soul, and I made up lies about lying, disobeying, chewing gum in church, to offer them as carefully as I handed over the knotted handkercheif of coins to the grocer when my mother sent me for a loaf of Wonder, Land O'Lakes, and two Camels. If guilt is the damage of childhood, then eros is the fall of adolescence. Of the fall begins there, and never ends, desire after desire parading through a lifetime like the Ringling Brothers elephants made to walk through the Queens-Midtown Tuunnel and down 34th Street to the Garden. So much of our desire like their bulky, shadowy walking after midnight, exiled from the wild and destined for a circus with its tawdry gaudiness, its unspoken pathos.  It takes more than half a century to figure out who they were, the few real loves-of-your-life and how much of the rest  the mad breaking-heart stickiness falls away, slowly, unnoticed, the way you lose your taste for things like Popsicles unthinkingly. And though dailiness may have no place for the ones that have etched themselves in the laugh lines and frown lines on the face that's harder and harder to claim as your own, often one love-of-your-life will appear in a dream, arriving with the weight and certitude of an elephant, and it's always the heart that wants to go out and wash the huge mysteriousness of what they meant, those memories that have only memories to feed them, and only you to keep them clean. 

These brown discolorations on a faded black- and-white photograph are not at all like a defect In anything remembered but, rather, a kind of  Crystallization  as Stendhal described it, in One of his more eccentric books about love. In truth, my childhood was cast down like a twig Into an abandoned salt mine near Salzburg From where it emerged, of this I m certain, As something much richer than my own life, A jeweled branch of living history, now Retrieved by my mother from the well at Twig Bog Lane. I ll never know who it was, and anyway Why would I want to know who it was, Who slid the black hard plastic button to OnOn One late summer afternoon in nineteen fifty-seven, So that not only did some kind of shutter flick open In my head, but the full force of color saturation Hit my brain. The effect was high-speed EktachromeEktachrome And life as it is now, that studio of constant poems    It s just that as my mother hauled the metallic Home Assistance milk gallon from the deep well In Twig Bog Lane, the light of deprivation reflected Back from her face and got lost in me, and I knew How biography is the steadying of only one kind Of lens, how memory offers different iterations; How, somewhere, a paper was being coated with Such chemicals that even deeper colors would form Over time. During that summer, a world away, The first International Color Salon was organized In Hong Kong and, while restrictions on dollar Imports meant that Ireland couldn t reach a speed Of 100 ASA, faster colors kept rushing in. There Was no holding life back once it swarmed; biography Was ready for color, our brains were marked That year for realities more personal, realities brighter Than a boxed-in lens. Huge Blackwater river rats That knawed through the doors of our dry toilets in Twig Bog Lane were as ignorant of color as me; and Could not have known that their multi-layered bristles Would soon be seen in more subtle shades of brown.

I was walking from the Louvre to Place Saint-Michel along the Seine when I noticed a crowd gathered under a large linden tree. As I approached I thought how much I d liked to walk down Unter den Linden when I d lived in Berlin, and now I saw again how attractive the light green seeds of the linden tree were against the darker green of the leaves. I was also agog to see what had caused the crowd to gather.As I neared I heard a mother say to her little boy,  Regardez, S bastien, les saltimbanques. Saltimbanques? This was a new word to me. I had a quick look on my iPhone and came up with the translation  mountebank.   I pushed my way as politely as possible through the crowd until I had a good view. It was a family of street performers. They had improvised a small stage on the wide pavement, and a father, mother, and ten-year-old or so boy were up there. The man was dressed in a striking yellow and blue outfit with white leggings and black shoes, and was banging a little drum rhythmically while the boy in a checked black-and-white jumpsuit capered about, playing thumb rolls on a tambourine, with a black-and-white dog dancing in perfect step alongside him. The woman dressed all in white sat on a stool playing quick dance music on a red tin whistle. On her head was a white floppy hat, sitting on which was a snowy owl who periodically flew in a circle over the heads of the crowd, coming back to land on the white hat. It was a scene worthy of being painted by the young Picasso, or the old Chagall. Or maybe by Gustave Dor . The boy on stage didn t look in the best of health, but I hoped I was wrong. The effect of the whole performance was strange and utterly charming. And the little troupe seemed to have emerged from another era   from that of Baudelaire, even.SaltimbanquesI was puzzled by the translation offered by my iPhone, however.  What I understood by the English word  mountebank  (which seemed very archaic) was either a person who sold quack medicines in public places, or a charlatan. These performers were no fakes. And yet, the English word, like the French, seemed to suggest the jumping up onto a stage. I d have to revisit my Shakespeare plays   I seemed to remember that he d liked using that word.When the white hat came round I put a  20 note into it, took a quick photograph of les saltimbanques and made my way to the nearest metro. I was almost surprised to see cars and motorbikes clogging the road.les saltimbanques

A woman ladder leans with her two-year-old boy in her arms. Her arms & legs & hands & feet are thin as crayons. The man ladder is holding his glass of bourbon, he is coming out of the child s drawing in his old open pajamas  he s in the war. The sky is blackest crayon-canyon. When does he leave again? When he leaves, I leave.          I like that river the sky.  

My parents kept me from children who were rough Who threw words like stones and wore torn clothes Their thighs showed through rags they ran in the street And climbed cliffs and stripped by the country streams. I feared more than tigers their muscles like iron Their jerking hands and their knees tight on my arms I feared the salt coarse pointing of those boys Who copied my lisp behind me on the road. They were lithe they sprang out behind hedges Like dogs to bark at my world. They threw mud While I looked the other way, pretending to smile. I longed to forgive them but they never smiled.



The subtlest strain a great musician weaves, Cannot attain in rhythmic harmony To music in his soul. May it not be Celestial lyres send hints to him? He grieves That half the sweetness of the song, he leaves Unheard in the transition. Thus do we Yearn to translate the wondrous majesty Of some rare mood, when the rapt soul receives A vision exquisite. Yet who can match The sunset s iridescent hues? Who sing The skylark s ecstasy so seraph-fine? We struggle vainly, still we fain would catch Such rifts amid life s shadows, for they bring Glimpses ineffable of things divine.  

At the podium measured and grave as a metronome the (white, male) poet with bald- gleaming head broods in gnom- ic syllables on the death of 12-year-old (black, male) Tamir Rice shot in a park by a Cleveland police officer claiming to believe the boy s plastic pistol was a  real gun  like his own eager to discharge and slay    while twelve feet away at the edge of the bright-lit stage the (white, female) interpreter signing for the deaf is stricken with emotion   horror, pity, disbelief   outrage, sorrow   young-woman face contorted and eyes spilling tears like Tamir Rice s mother perhaps, or the sister made to witness the child s bleeding out in the Cleveland park. We stare as the interpreter s fingers pluck the poet s words out of the air like bullets, break open stanzas tight as conches with the deft ferocity of a cormo- rant and render gnome-speech raw as hurt, as harm, as human terror wet-eyed and mouth-grimaced in horror s perfect O.while twelve feet awayat the edgeof the bright-lit stagethe (white, female) interpretersigning for the deaf is strickenwith emotion  horror, pity, disbelief  outrage, sorrow  young-woman face contortedand eyes spilling tearslike Tamir Rice s motherperhaps, or the sistermade to witnessthe child s bleeding outin the Cleveland park.We stareas the interpreter s fingerspluck the poet s words out of the airlike bullets, break open stanzastight as conches with the deftferocity of a cormo-rant and render gnome-speechraw as hurt, as harm,as human terrorwet-eyed and mouth-grimacedin horror s perfect O.

A circle. What was needed was a circuit, and a good operating system. What s within is without being seen to be so. Optical anomaly as unexceptional. Four left s a square. One way turning system until it becomes its other way. A passive insistence on multiples until that divorces itself, becomes single. A single pitch made up of the sounds of multiples. Conduction, instrumental absence. Fundamentals establish separate planets. Similarity wars upon their lines, planes. Said well, here opens, his, sits at its bottom. The bodies. Spoke well, agreed in kind, general. But the way of its expression requires hurt and then, treatment of skin for leather clothes or whatever, it s old, sometimes, often. Depending on the question, it can be the answer. One shouldn t be proud to not have it. A knee, an elbow, three arms up. Then a last one, a fourth. Last and happiest, willing, fully skin end. The whey, foam, on the head of the safest society in human civilization. Amnesia to people who will actually harm and hurt.

What over the gable-end and high up under tangled cloud            that raven might be saying to its tumble-soaring mate or what the blackbird might intend when chattering among            scattered breadcrumbs or what the bellowing of one cow then another in the near field might mean remains beyond            my ken being all noise for which no words will manage though all is language settling and unsettling the world            beyond me . . . and yet there s the dunnock in all its dun colours at work among the small stones and patchy grass            of the driveway and here s the robin s aggressive tilt at breadcrumbs and there goes the sudden shriek            of the blackbird . . . all alive inside the inhuman breath-pattern of the wind trawling every last leaf            and blade of grass and flinging rain like velvet pebbles onto the skylight: nothing but parables in every bristling inch            of the out-of-sight unspoken never-to-be-known pure sense-startling untranslatable there of the world as we find it.there   

You asked me last summer:  What is a doily?  Sometimes, at lunch, I walk on the beach. Today I was coatless. A storm cloud threatened, Dark as a spaceship. Should it pour, A sister ship down in the water Would throw up grappling nets to the surface, Rain rise to soak me. Behind a sandbank, Waves touched the shore, no more than a shimmer. Less rare than its cousin, the antimacassar, A doily s placed between sweet thing and china. Both survive where vicars arrive For tea, are given thin cup and saucer Instead of a mug. If your cake s so rich That it s leaking syrup, you ll need a doily. Held up, its paper s the filigree Of snowflake, or fingers looked through in fear. The shower holds off. My shoe s a doily. Without it, where would I be on these shells That crunch underfoot, like contact lenses, As I gingerly walk, on my mermaid way Back to my husband in his human dwelling? Someone is pulling a blue toy trawler Along the horizon to port, so smoothly It looks realistic. Sea s partly doily. Surfers ride its lace to their downfall, After all, we re nothing but froth. Like a carpet salesman, the indolent tide Flops a wave over, showing samples:  Madam, This one is durable, has a fringe.  Under Its breath the sea sighs,  Has it come To this? Must everything always end in ... doily?  It must. Broad afternoon. The rain-cloud barges Have passed and here s a cumulonimbus parade Of imperial busts, the Roman rulers In historical order which, I think, would please you. Their vapor curls and noble foreheads Are lit up in lilac because they re invading The west. Next come the philosophers and, last of all, The poets. Pulleys draw them delicately on. Here comes Lucretius, then Ovid, then Horace In lines, saying relentlessly,  Doily,   Doily,  Till stars take over and do the same.

There was a ship went into the sea over the body of my brother I am just a boy he was not much older than me the goddess is good and cruel wants her share of life, like us sparkling dust of birds far away whom we follow, the stars the blood red dust of life as my brother s face disappeared beneath us beneath the ship which carried us and the goddess to where we do not know leaving the war of my grandfather the smell of smoke following us our keel, my brother, knocking down the doors of the sea the tall, and the wild waves coming, crashing under the keel of my brother s name far from the sound of places we were leaving the roads we followed marching past my uncle s crooked mountain forts while his men called out at us with our long hair on our shoulders first by my brother s name who was this girl with him, leave her with us she is my brother, he said not glancing at me our songs we sang in the warm rain for the goddess blessed be her name her cloak the wild wood pigeons turning her crown the lone plover s crying where now are you brother?

When I close my eyes there s a white key. But maybe it s a box, so I can t press it. The sides are shell blue, but I can t check without turning the box. The musician told me his sister and he would say MorgemMorgem and expose the teeth and flare the nostrils to express a particular affection. The white box won t say Morgem. Or Corbemsalad.MorgemCorbemsalad It must be a heartbreaking desk. It says to be in on a secret just means to know you re in a secret    the pleasure s like two people beheld by a third in the act of making meaning. It says on one hospital floor the humans die. Another they give birth. A third they grow new chins. At a fourth they re lopped. When the floors mix by mistake, it s usually in the middle where the desk rasps under husks of  ink, and the nostrils grow for air. We talk, never sing, because music gives the god room to stretch and the god kills by growing in the head.

One has some glory brutal and rough, a kind of encounter Fame is not pursuant The splendid enterprise, peerage, and trench  Let us consider that flourish I had a friend who gloried, this seemed invisible to some He broke apart his face, he promoted "That was abandoning reputation to cover up shame" As evening borrows its tickle from sun And from retrospect, with alarm "I don't know anyone has got clean rid of it"

Careening over the highway in my lightweight Japanese Death Star buffeted by the great and powerful winds   icy winds of winter warming cold air with hot air under it   accordion pleats of natural disaster my disaster   in the past if you were to say to me   or to rage at me in a poem about America I would charge you a great failure   to even use the word. It is banality this land is suffering because poets    their great cohort      I look twice to save lives.  

Standing in front of a mirror, my mother tells me she is ugly says the medication is making her fat. I laugh & walk her back to the bed. My mother tells me she is ugly in the same voice she used to say no woman could love you & I watch herno woman could love you pull at her body & it is mine. My heavy breast. My disappointing shape. She asks for a bowl of plain broth & it becomes the cup of vinegar she would pour down my throat. Everyday after school, I would kneel before her. I would remove my clothes & ask her to mark the progress. It s important that I mention, I truly wanted to be beautiful for her. In my dreams I am thin & if not thin, something better. I tell my mother she is still beautiful & she laughs. The room fills with flies. They gather in the shape of a small boy. They lead her back to the mirror, but my reflection is still there.

Come our one great bushfire pigs, sty-released, declined to quit their pavements of gravel and shit. Other beasts ran headlong, whipping off with genitals pinched high. Human mothers taught their infants creek-dipping. Fathers galloped, gale-blown blaze stripping grass at their heels and on by too swift to ignite any houses. One horse baked in a tin shed, naked poultry lay about dead having been plucked in mid flight but where pigs had huddled only fuzzy white hoofprints led upwind over black, B B B and none stayed feral in our region.

Four square monks drive a Coupe de Ville Through the vale, over the hill   To get to where the savings are, They square their shoulders and point the car   They bang their heads when the radio blares That song about the lady who bought the stairs   And the dandy in back swirls down the chrome handle To cast weird sun on his pilgrim sandal   Where tokens once slurried to a buttercup Hajj What now? O shimmering mercantile Alcatraz!   Mobius ministries fringe the haze Of toothbrush choirs in a Yangtze glaze   Foaming in pollens of this lobotomized valley Ever since Yankee Candle broke up Bee s Alley   Where skanking confederates Did trail natty satins, debt   Free, and Sanity herself (Now a scent, top-shelf)   Administered to gutter pirate queens Mini homecomings woven on the cosmic screen   And whispered in a turtle s ear, Kid monk you dream, it was the beer   You vowed to brew Just like the thread will lose its screw   Just like the brain will shed its wrinkles, Diverting shipwreck s periwinkles   To be reborn in a lonely place, Truth s best conducted by an unclaimed face

Everyone in the room is cheering. This is what you do for a painting you love! We climb up on one another s shoulders, wave pom-poms that match the palette. We want to buy the season tickets to the train that huffs through this landscape. We want to climb the towers of this steely sculpture and hang the flag. Victory is ours! We have seen something to love here. Outside the gallery, there is an alley full of garbage. Beauty stops at the door. A scraggly tree is coming out of the pavement where the people are lined up, cigarettes and cell phones, waiting for a chance to look. They keep their giant fingers in their bags. Wear T-shirts of their favorite teams of artist assistants. On the alley wall, someone has drawn a hillside and a horse. A young man sits on a crate and peels the glue from under his nails. He nods. And looks. And soon, pulls out the chalk and adds a saddle and a man, who looks back and shouts as if he has found his enemy again.  

No one would take her when Ruth passed. As the survivors assessed some antiques, I kept hearing, "She's old. Somebody should put her down." I picked her up instead. Every night I tell her about the fish who died for her, the ones in the cheerful aluminum cans. She lies on my chest to sleep, rising and falling, rising and falling like a rowboat fastened to a battered dock by a string.

So grateful the process is clean and faithful. Does not cheat like a disenchanted spouse dozing on a haggard couch. Take heart: the process is always right    is automatic, phlegmatic. Clean, cold, and always refreshing. Brewed to perfection some say. Guaranteed to satisfy you might say. Give thanks the process is organized. Synchronized and sterilized. Optimized but not disguised, like the grown man at my door long after trick-or-treaters have gone, hand outstretched, mask covering his eyes. Thankful, too, for the oversight: no boogeyman standing over the drain pipe, clogging it with debris when no one sees so he can charge you your life for the cleaning; name your price. And how shall we praise the instruments of investigation? So shiny, so new, gleaming with silver and glass? No traces of fingerprints or funders. No whispered voices softly requesting, of the results, a first glance. There s no need to come clean. We know the process won t fall prey to steak and wine and then slink upstairs to spend some time, just a little. The process doesn t. The process wouldn t. The process isn t that kind.

The woman in the documentary reaches her hands to the fence      touches her child through an opening De mis manos      dolor     When I was a child      my mama drove me to the swap meet on the other side for a white dress & flowered wreath      my first Holy Communion      the mamas nursing on the roadside     selling chicle con sus manos libres      Abuelo once rode in the casket of a trunk      He rose again on our side of the border which crossed Bisabuela s family      Look from my balcony      the sleeping sister volcanoes shaped like breasts     I ve thought about leaving      Shoving a duffel bag & laptop into the car     taking the dog      But these babies I ve wanted since I was a child      That s what girls do where I grew up down the road from a landfill in the humid stench of a beef plant & sugar beets     hulled & boiled for their sweet white meat      I found an animal in a trap who d fought her way through high grasses wasting to carcass in my own backyard & I believe you know what a merciful act means      I don t know the words for the shame I ve carried The woman in the documentary needs papers to get back to her children     They d found her in the hospital      without insurance      la migra Mama nursed women who d run through asparagus fields  crackling heat      bellies full against the barbed wire they re still burying like umbilicals      roots on a battlefield if the child s a boy or the place where tortillas are made for a girl      Don t you dare say desert The heat is unbearable & I ve seen them pulling anchors from legs cursing bullet shells      In the hospital facing pig barns & a graveyard      Mama in her scrubs & gloves pulling newborns      bloodied like suicide wrists      Jars of coins for the ferryman & La Virgen burning an altar on my nightstand      Mis manos      Mis hijos      Whatever fence I ve erected from that salted curse in my family s blood      Release usRelease us The woman on the screen whispers a prayer      Fly usFly usfree as birds      Sin verg enza I admit the darknessfree as birds I ve swallowed      the hollow inside      Now      who will unpin our hands      & toward sky      upraise them

i have a red dress and no eyes. i have a dress that is blood red and i have eyes that don t blink when the balcony sucks in. my dress is a beet swollen with thought, and hangs like a body on my body. i have eyes that don t blink at being seen. i was halfway finished before i saw i d begun. my dress drips down the center. my eyes are needle holes and my dress is an over-red thread. i hang my words in the air by their feet, limp and damp, and my dress is my only laugh that is actually red. my eyes are the backs of moons and afterwards men jest us like children, and smoke, and women who have been my dress circle their stomachs with their hands. i m an actress. this is not my mother tongue. i have a dress that is yellow. my lines are written by a parisian man. we met in london. i came dancing out like god upon a crimson wave. my dress hung like a question or a suddenness. he wrote me coming out this way, he says, to make me like a lioness. the constellations are full of dead women, he says. he says my dress is the coat of a great lion. i turn like the blood inside a rose. the crowd is a great gasp. i can feel myself become a pear. it s as if you haven t taken pills, he says. i still have that dress. it s not too blonde or red. you can grasp it with your eyes, he said, the way you wear it.

Perhaps, this morning, we re there, normal and soon forgotten, as news is when it s passed over breakfast, like love, something that s always cast, too heavy to hold for long. We breathe it in, the bacon, the coffee. We listen to the little quavers as the local tongues, water over rock, rise and fall, like stones skipping soft into the white that smoothed them. The women speak like grandmothers, softly opening their mouths, opening and drawing advice from themselves, like biscuits, and offering in kindness a little more than anyone could ask, more than anyone can take. I know their pitying. It looks like patience, the look on everyone s faces as the peddler shuffles in his blindness, black hand held open, everyone awaiting the hiss of door, the whisper in everyone s throats, breaking from patience into pleasure.

Standing at the glass-paneled wall of Liza s kitchen           at the old house half-hidden Over a mile up Canyon Road in Joshua s gated compound I m just smoking a joint & looking down at the dusk          dusting the Malibu lights as they flare           Along the coastline below & I can hear the ripped-up Buick fenders & Caddy bumpers slammed around out          in the barn studio as they re slowly           Torched into art as Joshua moves the spitting arc-welder Over armatures of rebar shaping a dozen abstract          guitars or mandolins while its           Acetylene tongue ticks in the black shade of his visor Once in a while his back-in-the-day transistor radio          hooked on a nail bent in the wall           Cuts through the sizzle with a hit of his that s slipped Lately back into fashion & I ve watched him slowly lift           the head of that torch until it angles Against the turquoise plastic moon of the radio dial As if he might melt it all back to a few black platters             those times as lost as song

It seems so different   art that moves me now From the sort of art I longed for long ago Soaring   Vatic   Agon I waited yesterday on the unsure shoulder Of a drenched back road    From my car I could behold Our highway agent Gordon Fill a rut with a spade  climb up on his grader And smooth things smooth as the top of a kitchen table There were frost heaves by the score And culverts clotted shut by April floods So it was brilliant    what Gordon did with mud On Wallace Hill      Pure mire Out there   The road goes narrow as a needle On which   you might wonder   could dance how many angels I don't care   I didn't No earthly need to summon spirits   daemons No sign of them at all    Nor would I dream one I might have once but wouldn't Nor gyre nor golem    Nor great Leviathan Nor djinn     Nor fiend    Nor signifying wind Nor ElementargeistElementargeist That lingering in that lane might make me conjure I had to get somewhere and fetch my daughter To bring her home     Sweet Christ She might be standing in that mix of sleet And ugly rain    which called for Gordon's art I'm trying to be a grownup Better late than never    I suppose Or am I only jaded      I don't know It was as though I'd shown up Just to see him wield his spade and blade out there It kept me from surmising some furorfurordivinis    Why should I botherdivinis Now that I moved on    thanks be to Gordon Who signaled with his thumb for me to pass him He pulled the grader overYes give me something useful here    I saidYes give me something useful here    Impromptu        In my car it sounded odd To say it now sounds different I hope that Gordon watched me yesterday As I signaled back    I'd never have made my way Without a skillful agent I hope he saw me wave

In the Egyptian caf  in London, I drank coffee with men smoking hookah. Draw in, breathe out. The cup was small, the coffee harsh. I had to catch a train from Marble Arch. A still point, Byzantine, one star in a galaxy of trillions, I had to find my friends. Who cares what happened? I moved like a bat, darted, skittered towards the river. An old lady inching towards her complex screamed when I tried to help her with her walker. It was my life. The rooftops fracture. If I hadn t jostled the mosaic maybe I could stop the picture. Buildings of stirred beach glass. Cresting sunsets comb the face, refine the land. The world goes sad. Like now? Like now. Even the ancients felt slips, skips in experience plotted as mathematical fact.

Moon came to the forge in her petticoat of nard The boy looks and looks the boy looks at the Moon In the turbulent air Moon lifts up her arms showing   pure and sexy    her beaten-tin breasts Run Moon run Moon Moon If the gypsies came white rings and white necklaces they would beat from your heart Boy will you let me dance    when the gypsies come they ll find you on the anvil with your little eyes shut Run Moon run Moon Moon I hear the horses  hoofs Leave me boy! Don t walk on my lane of white starch The horseman came beating the drum of the plains The boy at the forge has his little eyes shut Through the olive groves in bronze and in dreams here the gypsies come their heads riding high their eyelids hanging low How the night heron sings how it sings in the tree Moon crosses the sky with a boy by the hand At the forge the gypsies cry and then scream The wind watches watches the wind watches the Moon    Translated from the SpanishTranslated from the SpanishTranslated from the SpanishTranslated from the Spanish

Look for me under the hood of that old Chevrolet settled in weeds at the end of the pasture. I'm the radiator that spent its years bolted in front of an engine shoving me forward into the wind. Whatever was in me in those days has mostly leaked away, but my cap's still screwed on tight and I know the names of all these tattered moths and broken grasshoppers the rest of you've forgotten.

i poured a bowl of cereal, threw the empty box in the trash can. granddaddy pulled the box from the trash, poured the crumbs into a bowl, then doused the sand in milk. he looked down at the bowl, murmuring about how he had survived the depression. toldsurvived the depression a story about asking for hot water at colored diners, how he would pour ketchup in cups to make soup. this was how i first learned i am              wasteful.      i would stand in the bathroom with my mother. would ask her why the water in the bowl was red. she would tell me she had eaten beets. i supposeeaten beets i was too young to learn the truth, milkflowers spill petals red.      in my catholic school of fish, we took a beautifully wrapped box, passed it around the class, unwrapping it piece by piece. afterwards it was cleverly explained that the box is a girl s virginity the gift we give our husbands. & who wants a toy that has already been opened? half the joy is in untying the string. this is how i was taught that at my very core, i am               ungrateful.      i met someone recently, in an irish bar, who told me it s about knowing what i need.knowing what i need he said laterwhat you needwhat you need is a wife. that night i prayed to god for just a manjust and not a man that trails the woe & maybe this is why god serves me wakes of milkman and tea cakemilkmantea cake a lip service of sorts at hand.      maybe this is how i end up throwing good things away: phd husband stepdaughter stepson a little tiny baby               unborn locked them all in flooding house with tearful grin. this is how you come to know you are                unclean.      at times i smell of rain, blouse damp with the cloud s breast milk, this stomach a sloshing bowl of watery swish. i curse the phantom belly moon, can still hear the sound of  you in still water.                             the wind begins to push a heavy rain, drops spill from every crevice of the flower. & then suddenly, the rain begins to pour. it always all ways asks for forgiveness. a ghost kneels in me,               asks to be spared.

My eyes turned to salt in looking back, my thoughts stood still in gestures, in the silence of what s been done; I gathered the crumbs of another lunch and shook them into the garden s vitreous air where the sun s just cracked and spilled. Here, even a flutter of blackbird beyond the hedge stands still, as my words stand still, like ships in bottles. Your language is mine but mine is not yours. At home, I could feel myself thinking while the television glowed in shadow and a film score spread like smoke in a saloon. I keep to myself what it means to tend a fire, the thick scent of soaked wood, a match between my fingers, the way a day resides in what s to do, in another light split by the clouds, a different sunset tied to the tallest trees flush in the eyes of houses, on the poor man s livestock; a touch here, a touch there   the way loneliness comes, today, a day like this, one day more alone.    Translated from the ItalianTranslated from the ItalianTranslated from the Italian

Ostrich and Lark started each morning together at first light, day in and day out.   And they parted at nightfall.   Every day they nibbled an ongoing meal: a few seeds here, a few seeds there; for Ostrich, the occasional lizard.   All day the sun glared out of cloudless blue.   Every day, all day, over the cidada s drone, a drizzle of buzzings fell, and a downpour of birdsong.   Hornbill, Bee-eater, Hoopoe, Diederik, Mousebird, Whydah, Canary: from gray-light-come to last-light-gone, the fancy-dressed suitors of the veld warbled their rain-shower jazz.   But Ostrich was silent.   Lark sang the first song of the day, perched tall, slender, the tawny brown on a termite castle or a low branch of a camel thorn tree.   But Ostrich was silent.   When Lark sang, he flickered his wings, and his white throat feathers trembled. All day Lark sang, standing still or flitting, his open wings vermillion-spangled.   But Ostrich was silent.   At dusk Lark sought his hidden nest on the ground.   Ostrich sat down under an acacia tree and tucked his head under one of his black-and-white wings.   Sometimes he dreamed of flying. Sometimes he dreamed of singing the sky full of stars.   Sometimes he dreamed of the green season, drinking caught water, and drinking, and drinking.   At first light, Lark called, and together they started their day.   One evening, as the great red sun sank toward the tree-spiked horizon and the birds swooped to their nests; as the plant eaters gathered at full alert and the meat eaters woke to prowl; as the gates of night opened to the dark,   Ostrich fluttered his billowy wings. He stretched his graceful neck, closed his eyes, and TWOO-WOO-WOOOT   Ostrich found his voice, a voice part lion s roar, part foghorn, part old man trumpeting into his handkerchief.   Ostrich was booming! Which is what ostriches do.   The veld fell silent.   And Ostrich boomed like thunderheads on the horizon. Ostrich boomed like the rainstorm that ends the dusty months of thirst.   Ostrich boomed like the promise of jubilant green, like the promise of birth.   Ostrich boomed Lark right off his perch!   Lark flew up to an Ostrich-high branch and looked at his friend with a big WOW in his eyes.   Ostrich had found his voice at last, his own beauty, his big, terrific self.  

The way my grandmother put back the green bananas, unwilling to make an investment in her future, is how I m feeling, watching my grown children watching CNN, sitting side by side on the sofa no teasing, no tattling  just image upon image of Armageddon: starvation, explosions,           long lines at the gas pump, and even the Rabbi abandoning town.           Biological, my son says. And my daughter answers no, nuclear.Biologicalno, nuclear. I m too embarrassed just now to admit how happy I am to have them home again, even though they re only visitors, no longer  at home.  I built my house too close to the water, I built my house too close to the water   my grandmother used to say whenever I went away. She meant she was easily moved to tears, and it took my own mother years to teach me the impossibility of protecting the weak from the strong. Enough crying, she d say, clicking her tongueEnough crying   like she was contesting the intricate but historical patterns of sudden death. You don t die so easily. You have to suffer first.ou don t die so easily. You have to suffer first. She meant, I now know, to comfort me, to protect me from her brother s tank blown upside down in Germany,   the long lines at the gas pumps, the clergy blissfully following their prayers back home. O but then she d kiss whatever ailed me, while my sister railed against injustice, her theme song exploding above the cushion separating her rights from all I m still doing wrong.  How can we expect world peace, my father would have said,How can we expect world peace,   if he wasn t at that very moment watching I Love Lucy s slideI Love Lucy across the world s stage on an overripe banana when under one roof my own two children can t get along.when under one roof my own two children can t get along.   As for me, just now I m setting the table and filling the fruit bowl, whistling like Ricky Ricardo, unaware of his wife s grand schemes, the well intentioned but certain and coming disaster. Please stay,Please stayGrandma, I say, holding her tightly in the aisle, unashamed of my tears.Grandma, But of course, she died that very day, falling into honeydews, the melons, like hand grenades, rolling every which way.  

I come off a little bit ventilated but you must realize the material world is constantly crumbling under my eyes it's too much for the novel tongue I speak the glitter of pavement in my brainstem, you must accommodate the polytonal grimace of the set lips becoming a smile, and you must accept the thin section of arm advancing across your peripheries to grip you in pleasure, measuring feeling in your restraint We have lived through the most furious little chunk of history for this? that we must unburden ourselves on night roof air, presuming the poise and perks of champ pigeon teams planing the evening winds until, signaled from the roof with a flag we become American birds



There is a brand of play called muteness Beneath the play yard s interlacing branches.   It appeals to children born  Entre deux guerres, whose specialty it is.      It is mutiny; that is, a tongue   Of foreign origin ending in grunts.    One such child uses his tongue On a frozen fence for the embrace of it   For the mutating appendage makes of speech  A combat; an internment.   There is a brand of child assisted to the play yard By his keeper fussing with his zipper.     Yes, it is cold in the high hemisphere And nothing will be the death of him   As he sets hard sweets on his tongue  He neither chews nor swallows.    Such children can never swing too freely   From the elm s loping barkless arm.    It is mutual. There is smoke on the air, tarry,   Commuting the industry on high   As the children simmer within Their word-cloud.    And someone or something is calling them home A familiar voice, if they have one.

These are the lines on which a committee is formed.These are the lines on which a committee is formed.      Almost as soon as work was begun in the tunnel      men began to die among dry drills. No masks.      Most of them were not from this valley.      The freights brought many every day from States      all up and down the Atlantic seaboard      and as far inland as Kentucky, Ohio.      After the work the camps were closed or burned.      The ambulance was going day and night,      White s undertaking business thriving and      his mother s cornfield put to a new use.       Many of the shareholders at this meeting       were nervous about the division of the profits;       How much has the Company spent on lawsuits?       The man said $150,000. Special counsel:       I am familiar with the case. Not   :   one    :    cent.         Terms of the contract. Master liable.        No reply. Great corporation disowning men who made. . . .       After the lawsuits had been instituted. . . .The Committee is a true reflection of the will of the people.The Committee is a true reflection of the will of the people.      Every man is ill. The women are not affected,      This is not a contagious disease. A medical commission,      Dr. Hughes, Dr. Hayhurst examined the chest      of Raymond Johnson, and Dr. Harless, a former      company doctor. But he saw too many die,      he has written his letter to Washington.The Committee meets regularly, wherever it can.The Committee meets regularly, wherever it can.      Here are Mrs. Jones, three lost sons, husband sick,      Mrs. Leek, cook for the bus cafeteria,      the men: George Robinson, leader and voice,      four other Negroes (three drills, one camp-boy)      Blankenship, the thin friendly man, Peyton the engineer,      Juanita absent, the one outsider member.      Here in the noise, loud belts of the shoe-repair shop,      meeting around the stove beneath the one bulb hanging.      They come late in the day. Many come with them      who pack the hall, wait in the thorough dark.This is a defense committee. Unfinished business:This is a defense committee. Unfinished business:      Two rounds of lawsuits, 200 cases      Now as to the crooked lawyers      If the men had worn masks, their use would have involved      time every hour to wash the sponge at mouth.      Tunnel, 3  miles long. Much larger than      the Holland Tunnel or Pittsburgh s Liberty Tubes.      Total cost, say, $16,000,000.This is the procedure of such a committee:This is the procedure of such a committee:      To consider the bill before the Senate.      To discuss relief.           Active members may be cut off relief,                16-mile walk to Fayetteville for cheque                 west virginia relief administration, #22991 west virginia relief administration, #22991                to joe henigan, gauley bridge, one and 50/100,to joe henigan, gauley bridge, one and 50/100,                winona national bank. paid from state funds.winona national bank. paid from state funds.      Unless the Defense Committee Acts;      the People s Press, supporting this fight,People s Press,       signed editorials, sent in funds.      Clothing for tunnel-workers.           Rumored, that in the post-office           parcels are intercepted.           Suspected: Conley. Sheriff, hotelman,           head of the town ring            Company whispers. Spies,           The Racket.      Resolved, resolved.      George Robinson holds all their strength together:      To fight the companies          to make somehow a future.       At any rate, it is inadvisable to keep a community of dying           persons intact.        Senator Holt. Yes. This is the most barbarous example of           industrial construction that ever happened in the world.       Please proceed.       In a very general way Hippocrates  Epidemics speaksEpidemics           of the metal digger who breathes with difficulty,           having a pain and wan complexion.           Pliny, the elder. . . .        Present work of the Bureau of Mines. . . .         The dam s pure crystal slants upon the river.           A dark and noisy room, frozen two feet from stove.           The cough of habit. The sound of men in the hall           waiting for word.                  These men breathe hard                but the committee has a voice of steel.                One climbs the hill on canes.                They have broken the hills and cracked the riches wide.                  In this man s face                family leans out from two worlds of graves                 here is a room of eyes,                a single force looks out, reading our life.                  Who stands over the river?                Whose feet go running in these rigid hills?                Who comes, warning the night,                shouting and young to waken our eyes?                  Who runs through electric wires?                Who speaks down every road?                Their hands touched mastery; now they                demand an answer.   

He said   long ago   that myth was dead. He meant it.    Myth is dead!   Long live myth!    They are playing out something. Legendary.   Picks up her glass. She has a glass, with coffee,   ice and milk in it. Thinks about the refugees on the   road. Road to what, to where? With nothing but   their clothes on their backs. Mythic and literal.   How to speak about them and why? How to speak   to them. To keep them in mind. In our minds.    Bless you and keep you,  so the prayer says.  

On the back of an invoice I wrote my name in large Capitalist June Blue Letters And because money was involved And so was my name ever in jeopardy On the back of the same invoice I rewrote my name in large Capitalist June Blue Letters And in Leopardy and in Jeopardy I resolved, dissolved upon a radical eradicator Inking in, dissolving upon Jeopardizing in my own name in large Capitalist June Blue Letters

Stuck pat with strawberry magnets to her sub-zero are all the stages: gill slits, lungs, sex stopped at the third month, when the fetus is sucked out into a clear plastic bag. Reaching in for a quick soda, you can almost feel that flexible wind on your face. The fetus (named Jennifer, it says)Jennifer,  develops in color-photo sequence till the second trimester, when (more bold-face) the kid's a murder victim, in cold blood, of Mom. You beckon to nothing: milk cartons, cans, stand in the chill blast of the suction door and grab your Sprite. Day and night she stands outside the clinics with the other Lifers. My advice: don't take her on. I once learned phylogeny provides intelligent options but survival does not always select for insight. Down the line: there's a smug printed sign talking up adoption: Right. So, knocked up, I'd owe my body to an forgiving god, who'd swallow my offspring t00? Here's a fat man rattling a blood red genie in a pickle jar. No wedding ring. See that woman, head bent they're hurrying her through the police cordon, past the screaming faces? I've walked where she's walking now  and where she lies now, I once lay, behind that secured door, near that white waiting table. My mind divided, momentarily, as if the world were just birth or no birth, what I could or could not do and still seem human to myself. Who first fixed in my head that slashed membrane between life and death? (I'd go toe-to-toe against her, but she stops me cold with her small, past due figure of remorse.) God, what next?  she asks,God, what next?   leaning against her icebox, her T-shirt shouting how she pities the unborn. So do I. But not as much as I pity her, quickening with hate. And love: for those would-belove:  lives inbred to a set of family gestures. One day on our way to the frog pond we take my daughter's hands, saying nothing one on each side. She asks me why I don't see what she believes. I want to say I do, I see through all the cross-I do wielding apologists to why she, alone in her kitchen, grieves. It's sad. The big frogs croak like TV preachers pad to pad. But look: at the pond rim she points out tadpoles hundredsm ink-black, legless. See? we both say. My daughter kneels, tries to cup them in her fist, but they're too fast. Born again and again into the limits of our perception, they swim intuitively, the way we think. She calls that revelation. We're surrounded by the bull chorus, a booming, backlit percussion. CallCall it revelation she says aloud, and I won't, though I'd call it the soul of a woman. Not the one she discovers at conception. No, this one, thisthis one,  split-cell insight, sister, sister, this raw fixed light in her face set to mine.  

Vulture, follow me up: here is the arm my mother held me aloft with (as well as she could, until she couldn t), it is cut free of her body now, pulled away from her shoulder, away from her breath, as you, Vulture, point your wing toward her offered heart, toward me    let s pound her fingers into paste, pound the hand open, come down, I chant, each word opens the sky, the clouds need to be warned   once she was hand & now she is wing, once she was dirt & now she is air, she was food & now she is bird, she was lifted & now she is gone.

the union president s dead & they won t let transgender   people pee in north carolina & here i m complaining about   climbing the mountain again the mountain ll always remain   if i m lucky, to keep me from sucking & only a king mule will   do. humbled by bill as he goes through the business of staying   alive with dignified unconcern. i don t deserve him, have no zen   no dasein, just half-a-dozen self -inflicted wounds i m expected   to grin & bear & like robert plant, i do. it s like i m in   a rembrandt or something holding testtubes to the sun   to read my urine specimens &  spoiler alert i m trigger sad   checked my email mid-poem so of course its bad news   the ancient city is practically gone, palmyra, palmyra   at least i still have bill here in isis usa  

Carnations are best. Or roses, tight, before they go blowsy. Daffodils last. Tulips are no good    go limp soon as you look at  em. Lilies are OK, but mark us with rust you can t shift. Mam asks too many questions. We leave the lilies. Doug and me   we re quick. When the earth is fresh we circle in to harvest. This is our meadow. Stem first into plaggy bags we ribbon from our pockets, then off, running the back way to the village. To the florist, past wreaths and In Memoriams, where the old ladyIn Memoriam will peer at our haul, sniff, mebbe give us change from her pouch. Her sleeve is more snot-streaked than mine. And nails blacker. Some days Mam says she don t understand why I leave me tea but other times I ve hollow legs. I shrug. Tongue the toffee in a back tooth.

Right now I'm sipping a mango lassi in Action Town. I'm not bereft at all. In fact, I'm pleasantly aware of people moving on all fours. Our voice and text messages will be erased in no time. When I walk into stores they call me Spark Plug because I have a sparky manner. Things get all wavy from their constant attention. It's going to be okay. I'm a good habit: you don't need to trick me. I'm not sure where I should put my hands when I walk down the street with you. It's funny to think about who I would call if something really awful happened. I'd be jumping up and down not knowing who to call. My way of doing things is scary even to me. Remember the toothbrush, the honey bear, and the meal that we thought would never end? I'm counting on you to come through high water, to come through chaos, and to Action Town, where we'll lift our aces to skyward aviation.  

My mother s named for places, not Sandusky that has wild hair soliciting the moon like blue-black clouds touring. Not Lorain with ways too benevolent for lay life. Ashtabula comes closer, southern, evangelical and accented, her feet wide as yams.   She s Florida Missouri, a railroad, sturdy boxcars without life of their own, filled and refilled with what no one can carry.   You just can t call somebody Ravenna who s going to have to wash another woman s bras and panties, who s going to wear elbow-length dishwater to formal gigs, who s going to have to work with her hands, folding and shuffling them in prayer.  

Little soul, you have wandered lost a long time. The woods all dark now, birded and eyed. Then a light, a cabin, a fire, a door standing open. The fairy tales warn you: Do not go in, you who would eat will be eaten. You go in. You quicken. You want to have feet. You want to have eyes. You want to have fears.

'I love you,' he wouldn't say: it was against his philosophy; I-love-you
didn't mean what it meant, plus the verray construction of the phrase
caused bad-old-concrete-lawman-vandal-verbal-mildew-upon-the-grape-
harvest-and-war-for-rare-minerals-required-to-manufacture-commu-
nications-devices damage; saying I-love-you damaged love, subject and
object; plus he could prove this in two dense and delphic languages
suitable for philosophy, opera, cursing, and racking the nerves of arti-
ficial intelligence machines that perhaps could love but would be
hard-wired giammai to dare say so. So what moved him to not-say
I-love-you? What wake-up-and-spoil-the-coffee ashtray-licking djinn? I
have to start to agree. The verbness of it impropriety (eyes glob up the
syringe when you're giving blood: semisolid spiralling); perhaps too
active... I-love-you, I sand you, I drill you, I honey and set you for wasps,
crimson you like a stolen toga, add value applying dye, fight owner-
ship, I cite you to justify skilled outrage, put your name as guarantor
on an astronomical mortgage, I admit desertification comes as a relief,
from I to O, O my oasis, O my mirage. Maybe the verb is a tending-to-
wards? A tightrope? A tropism? A station? But that's meeting him on
his own ground; plus I can't disprove entire languages; plus those
three little words aren't meant as saying. An icy drink in stormlight. A
looked-at leaf left to transpire its own way until... And sans I-love-you
the centuried moon rose above dinnermint stone; many men contin-
ued  talking; a woman lifted her sarsenet skirt, peed on green lilies and,
utterly gracious, walked through the archway to join the mixed group
delighting in   word! believe it!   fresh air.

Large green-tailed lizard, zucchini-mottled flicks and swirls. But, no! It s not some random lizard: that s the snake! A rill of water falling up the stone, he d heard my light, quick foot     as human-hard. And the dream? that wildly handsome man who had no wife,     his wife had  gone away  (but where?)     so he wanted to meet more     women he needed help    with his decor, his place was encumbered with little ceramic, clay- kitsch banalities        I did not see the snake s head, since it faced away.     I could not fix it being vipera or serpente.viperaserpente That question hinged on poison in his mix. From what I saw, though,  twas a very handsome snake.                                                                                                                                    Options:Options: scaled to the human boy  or was it  scaled to the human body ? Which did I write? scaled to the human boy  or was it  scaled to the human body ? Which did I write?Options:Options:Desire? temptation? yearning for danger? thralldom? lust? You can add to the list yourself. You can add yourself to the list.Desire? temptation? yearning for danger? thralldom? lust? You can add to the list yourself. You can add yourself to the list.Options:Options:Teasing enchantment.  How still the Riddle lies. Teasing enchantment.  How still the Riddle lies. Options:Options:Insistent      Shaft       a tighter Breathing Insistent      Shaft       a tighter Breathing The sibyl s many leaves are laurel made for wreathing.The sibyl s many leaves are laurel made for wreathing.

My husband's out-of-town so I set Our house on fire. Champagne And eggs, asparagus for breakfast. Water for lunch. I eat dinner early In the late afternoon while the wind Disorganizes leaves, leaving me To clean them up. I think that the Imagination's guided by logic  A hand that's used to translating Images of rain to snow. Error-filled, The night destroys the details of Poems the pearls worn by Beethoven In secret, the rocks H.D. mistook For seaweed as she walked In exaltation toward the beach. Is it Possible to sing the imagination Into being? And is it possible for us To valorize autumn by cloaking in Difficult language the paths of stars? Geraniums, they make entr'actes Out of air as I walk past them. Always these goddamn leaves And acorns shat on our house by The goddamn oak. One of us will fail The other, will plagiarize language From the other, that's certain. Acorns are beautiful only to those Who've never had to clean them up.

So here are the strange feelings that flicker in you or anchor like weights in your eyes. Turn back and you might undo them, the way trees seem to float free of themselves as they root. A swan can hold itself on the gray ice water and not waver, an open note upon which minor chords blur and rest. But it was born dark. The shore of that lake is littered with glass. How you came to be who you are was all unwinding, aimless on a bike, off to retrieve a parcel that could only be a gift, and felt, as a child, the sea weave around your feet, white light rushing in with the surf. What lived there?                                  Joy, dispatched from nowhere, and no need to think about your purpose, and no fear that the sun gliding down might burn the earth it feeds. Black habitat of now in which decimation looks tender. Sometimes the call of a bird is so clear it bruises my hands. At night, behind glass, light empties out then fills a room and the people in it, hovering around a fire, gorgeous shapes of wind leaning close to each other in laughter. From this distance, they are a grace, an ache. The kingdom inside.

Ah, how poets sing and die! Make one song and Heaven takes it; Have one heart and Beauty breaks it; Chatterton, Shelley, Keats and I  Ah, how poets sing and die!

I fed my father what as it turned out the future would call his last meal (tho at the time neither he nor I was required to think it that exactly)  ground chourico & chopped green pepper open-faced on a burger bun, french fries, a cupcake with icing almost chocolate in flavor alarming, a departure from his diet of low-sodium, zeroed-out trans fats & sugar-free vegetables with high fiber- scores, suffering as he had been for years from barbarian cholesterol & geriatric diabetes (the nurse shrugged simply & said "why not?"  meaning of course that we should get it, all of us, he was going to die,was and soon). A few loose chitters of ground sausage fell onto his johnnie from the fork I lifted to his mouth they left tiny, paprika-red dots of oil on the sheer cotton, prussic red, corpuscle red like the small scabs my sister and I had left on his face while helping him shave the day before. A week earlier I had visited him at home; the day an unusually warm day in a March unusually cold. He was telling me how he'd gone out into the yard to get some sun only to return minutes later to the house, the wind far too strong  he said he worried that if the wind took his hat from his head, he might die while chasing it. I made a joke forced to, I thought chasing a hat, I said, that might be a better death than most, I said maybe the death certificate would read "killed by the wind." He laughed all right. You know, he said, you've really got a lousy sense of humor. Better than nothing, I guess (did hehe say that, or did I thinkthat, it?). Later he said . . . he'd said earlier . . . then I said . . . he said . . . I said . . . I said . . . I said . . . Say now that this might be all that's left for consolation, this might be love at the end, the confidences exchanged  all these pratfalls, & this skin chapped by a blade, and your willing servant's shaky hands, then a short trip to be washed a last, finally blameless time (so the scriptures say) in the blood of the lamb: a smell like the smell of sweetgrass burning crosswise the length of a dry plain and sent by a wind whose swiftness has in it the bright voices of kindergarteners, children born of a hardship town.

It is Hermes stepping off his winged sandal.... I saw the Writing Spider sitting with aplomb... I saw the Writing Spider sitting with aplombI saw the Writing Spider sitting with aplomb Even his caduceus, despite the scandaldead center her creation, above the compostdead center her creation, above the compostdead center her creation, above the compost of its forfeiture, lies abandoned(sage location); what I wondered most(sage location); what I wondered most(sage location); what I wondered most like an Android or iPad on a nightstandwas whether the sweetgum burrs and dried leaveswas whether the sweetgum burrs and dried leaveswas whether the sweetgum burrs and dried leaves grown footed for the purpose of bearing awaywere ornaments or accidents she interweaveswere ornaments or accidents she interweaveswere ornaments or accidents she interweaves any such device or gadget as mayin the clearly golden silk, whose subwebsin the clearly golden silk, whose subwebsin the clearly golden silk, whose subwebs distract him from a more pressing matter.are occupied by diminutive male sub-celebsare occupied by diminutive male sub-celebsare occupied by diminutive male sub-celebs Herse is perched on the precipice of the mattressholding down the fort (as she holds court)holding down the fort (as she holds court)holding down the fort (as she holds court) with its luxurious bedspread, where tapestrylong after she vanishes, stopping shortlong after she vanishes, stopping shortlong after she vanishes, stopping short vis- -vis itself interleaves the allegory.of the epiphany or apotheosisof the epiphany or apotheosisof the epiphany or apotheosis Real gold thread weighs the coverswe expect from genteel arts, or a goddesswe expect from genteel arts, or a goddesswe expect from genteel arts, or a goddess a cherub heaves to turn down for the lovers. Who thereupon did rende the cloth in pieces every whit, Who thereupon did rende the cloth in pieces every whit, Who thereupon did rende the cloth in pieces every whit, Would that the same in his wings might tip the scales,Bicause the lewdnesse of the Gods was biased so in it.Bicause the lewdnesse of the Gods was biased so in it.Bicause the lewdnesse of the Gods was biased so in it. and with tears, put salt in these mythical talesAnd with an Arras weavers combe of Box she fiercely smitAnd with an Arras weavers combe of Box she fiercely smitAnd with an Arras weavers combe of Box she fiercely smit by sinking level with us l enfant in the room ...l enfantArachne on the forehead full a dozen times and more. Arachne on the forehead full a dozen times and more. Arachne on the forehead full a dozen times and more. 

Some will call the suicide bomber a coward but seeing him   you think only, Hungry,Hungry, stumbling as he is toward you,   to the tent where pilgrims stop to eat and drink.   Behind you a woman in a black robe scoops rice with her fingers.   Beside her a girl, restless, runs out onto the dusty two-lane road   that the bomber now crosses. This is happening   at the end of forty days of mourning,   the anniversary a martyrdom. The girl returns breathless   and the mother gives her a glass of clean water.   You watch the ripple down her throat, and out of sunlight   the man approaches  his eyes, like yours, are brown.   Now you hear someone say, Sit, sit.Sit, sit. It is the mother talking to the daughter.   And now someone is shouting, and now there is the terrible noise.   Every person is a story. You are the man who walked out   as he walked in, the bomb went off, and you lived to tell.

When the strange girl skips rope her hair flies like a porpoise. She collects things that melt and things that tick, circles and cubes and checkerboards in a drawer   she can pull out from her navel. Other children, alerted by the rumble of marbles in her chest, chase her across the field. She insists she is only   hungry, but they pin her down and open her up. Cockroaches rush out and bullies run and squeal, crushing carapaces underfoot. She gathers as many as she can,   tells them she s sorry there is no lock. She s sorry, but good children shouldn t have secrets.  

It is patent to the eye that cannot face the sun The smug philosophers lie who say the world is one; World is other and other, world is here and there, Parmenides would smother life for lack of air Precluding birth and death; his crystal never breaks  No movement and no breath, no progress nor mistakes, Nothing begins or ends, no one loves or fights, All your foes are friends and all your days are nights And all the roads lead round and are not roads at all And the soul is muscle-bound, the world a wooden ball. The modern monist too castrates, negates our lives And nothing that we do, make or become survives, His terror of confusion freezes the flowing stream Into mere illusion, his craving for supreme Completeness means be chokes each orifice with tight Plaster as he evokes a dead ideal of white All-white Universal, refusing to allow Division or dispersal Eternity is now And Now is therefore numb, a fact he does not see Postulating a dumb static identity Of Essence and Existence which could not fuse without Banishing to a distance belief along with doubt, Action along with error, growth along with gaps; If man is a mere mirror of God, the gods collapse. No, the formula fails that fails to make it clear That only change prevails, that the seasons make the year, That a thing, a beast, a man is what it is because It is something that began and is not what it was, Yet is itself throughout, fluttering and unfurled, Not to be cancelled out, not to be merged in world, Its entity a denial of all that is not it, Its every move a trial through chaos and the Pit, An absolute and so defiant of the One Absolute, the row of noughts where time is done, Where nothing goes or comes and Is is one with Ought And all the possible sums alike resolve to nought. World is not like that, world is full of blind Gulfs across the flat, jags against the mind, Swollen or diminished according to the dice, Foaming, never finished, never the same twice. You talk of Ultimate Value, Universal Form  Visions, let me tell you, that ride upon the storm And must be made and sought but cannot be maintained, Lost as soon as caught, always to be regained, Mainspring of our striving towards perfection, yet Would not be worth achieving if the world were set Fair, if error and choice did not exist, if dumb World should find its voice for good and God become Incarnate once for all. No, perfection means Something but must fall unless there intervenes Between that meaning and the matter it should fill Time s revolving hand that never can be still. Which being so and life a ferment, you and I Can only live by strife in that the living die, And, if we use the word Eternal, stake a claim Only to what a bird can find within the frame Of momentary flight (the value will persist But as event the night sweeps it away in mist). Man is man because he might have been a beast And is not what he was and feels himself increased, Man is man in as much as he is not god and yet Hankers to see and touch the pantheon and forget The means within the end and man is truly man In that he would transcend and flout the human span: A species become rich by seeing things as wrong And patching them, to which I am proud that I belong. Man is surely mad with discontent, he is hurled By lovely hopes or bad dreams against the world, Raising a frail scaffold in never-ending flux, Stubbornly when baffled fumbling the stubborn crux And so he must continue, raiding the abyss With aching bone and sinew, conscious of things amiss, Conscious of guilt and vast inadequacy and the sick Ego and the broken past and the clock that goes too quick, Conscious of waste of labour, conscious of spite and hate, Of dissension with his neighbour, of beggars at the gate, But conscious also of love and the joy of things and the power Of going beyond and above the limits of the lagging hour, Conscious of sunlight, conscious of death s inveigling touch, Not completely conscious but partly and that is much.  

An apple tree bent double with fruit grew in the middle of the living room shaking gently as the average family pootled by with plates or devices in their hands The room was almost all tree everyone edged round it Curiously no one picked a single apple nor did the ripe fruit ever fall The full tree stood there a daemon to behold Who lives in that house now I can t tell you My childhood lives on there and my parent shadows and all my days and nights that will never bear fruit The apple tree I speak of roots itself partly in truth and partly in lies Those roots are splinters of the true cross They alone know why miracles are best avoided

The American common is no collective or princedom but privacies of need & pleasure as they intersect in public spaces, tho the insufferable powers that be breed their plots behind our backs, thinking us witless, seemingly blind to their afflicted intentions, just a bunch of demographic motormouths & screw-ups to be targeted by commodities traders & search engines  a marketing niche for every need, stereotypes tagged by algorithms here is a typical teamhere  of baton twirlers in an airport bar, each of them clad in foxy red track suits & tuned-in to the dollhouse stimulations of pigeon-talking sales reps; therethere is a previously undetected aggregation of retirees, evangelical camp kids, kickass bowlers, and mothy nuns in starched wimples, for whom the news of the day means the aging boy-man Hugh Grant's fear of double chins neither of these or any other data dump entirely false, but so narrow-minded sometimes as to lose sight of us entirely: the midtown lady in Capris, a four-square surgeon off-duty & headed out to play poker, the plumber fly-fishing by the river  a sky of twilight slate now not a word written on it.

Your name is Diana Toy. And all you may have for breakfast is rice gruel. You can't spit it back into the cauldron for it would be unfilial. You can't ask for yam gruel for there is none. You can't hide it in the corner for it would surely be found, and then you would be served cold, stale rice gruel. This is the philosophy of your tong: you, the child, must learn to understand the universe through the port-of-entry, your mouth, to discern bitter from sweet, pungent from bland. You were told that the infant Buddha once devoured earth and spewed forth the wisdom of the ages. Meat or gruel, wine or ghee, even if it's gruel, even if it's nothing, that gruel, that nothingness will shine into the oil of your mother's scrap-iron wok, into the glare of your father's cleaver, and dance in your porcelain bowl. Remember, what they deny you won't hurt you. What they spare you, you must make shine, so shine, shine . . .

Because I must not get up to throw down in a caf  in the Midwest, I hold something like a clownfaced herd of bareback and winged elephants stomping in my chest, I hold a thousand kites in a field loosed from their tethers at once, I feel my skeleton losing track somewhat of the science I ve made of tamp, feel it rising up shriek and groove, rising up a river guzzling a monsoon, not to mention the butterflies of the loins, the hummingbirds of the loins, the thousand dromedaries of the loins, oh body of sunburst, body of larkspur and honeysuckle and honeysuccor bloom, body of treetop holler, oh lightspeed body of gasp and systole, the mandible s ramble, the clavicle swoon, the spine s trillion teeth oh, drift of hip oh, trill of ribs, oh synaptic clamor and juggernaut swell oh gutracket blastoff and sugartongue syntax oh throb and pulse and rivulet swing and glottal thing and kick-start heart and heel-toe heart ooh ooh ooh a bullfight where the bull might take flight and win!

There is a white stone cliff over a dropping slope sliced along with bare trees. In the center of the cliff is a round dry fountain of polished stone. By seizing my whole body up as I clench my hand I am able to open the fountain into a drain, revealing below it the sky, the trees, a brown and uncertain ground. This is how my heart works, you see? This is how love works? Have some sympathy for the great spasms with which I must open myself to love and close again, and open. And if I leapt into the fountain, there is just no telling: I might sever myself clean, or crack the gold bloom of my head, and I don t know onto what uncertain ground I might fold like a sack.

Robins in the cottonwoods, holding still as the thin snow comes. The sun seems to flood them with blood. They have settled in the empty branches while the storm-lamps spit in your limbs, red evening swinging across the sky then dropping, ragged, into your frame to stay with you as you move and smile and have opinions. Then a woman s torso white with dawn  their rich perch is yours, there is nothing you need to expect or retrieve, like warm fields floating toward an invisible moon. A person learns stone-throated composures and barters for days of calm weather, like a man in a dream who understands the answering pressure of eyes you ask too much. But the birds are not reckless. Every minute their fat shapes are filling with sun, and I apprentice myself to their candor. Their bodies drift on the moving branches, solid  they are not taking and keeping. They are not torn papers in a rumor of wind, their small backs brown fields holding thunderclouds up. Inside their bodies, nothing falls to the earth and dies.

There were scruffy local prophets just beyond cannon-range in every hamlet. Door-Hinge Guillem, say, in Lebanon, OH   gets no respect   or Josh the Carpenter, for example, out on a limb in Galilee, RI. Him they tend to snub, until winter cracks the mast off the yacht, && the tub starts to founder petrified in flounder- nets (Ocean s cold reprimand). Time gets old, echoes grow faint; the statue in the park steps into evening dark, amnesia puts on war-paint. Your icon, buried in the garden sank like a thousand ships into the grass. Those lips still graze my ear, sheep-warden    whispering forgotten words out of a lichen-book. Words of the sea. Look, their wave-trace in the woods    a cedar replica. Her milky kingdom was a salt-spray splinter, Noah s rudder-stump   her shuddering Shaker-wheel spelled freedom.freedom

april 1 april 1april 1 found on our driveway   like a feather dropped     by a crow      8 of spades,        a playing    card /           we played Crazy Eights, slapping        cards or holding them        as if they were birds that might fly        out of our hands   like a feather dropped    by a crow  8 of spades,       a playing   card /       we played Crazy Eights, slapping       cards or holding them       as if they were birds that might fly       out of our hands decades ago, in our childhood        like the translucent, whirling        image I imagine, prismatic and phosphorescent           a murmuration of starlings swooping        and iridescent        like the translucent, whirling       image I imagine, prismatic and phosphorescent          a murmuration of starlings swooping       and iridescent but it dissolved onto a gray wall, undecorated        / glimpses of us wearing our        velvet Sunday best dresses, yours        usually crimson, mine blue           we never had nice shoes.        / glimpses of us wearing our       velvet Sunday best dresses, yours       usually crimson, mine blue       we never had nice shoes. Now you have returned to water  thanks to the Neptune Society spreading        your ashes over the Pacific   thanks to the Neptune Society spreading       your ashes over the Pacific    april 2   Ceylon tea   that amber cup april 2april 2               from Sri Lanka, popularly known here, before             Americans became tea drinkers, as                  Orange Pekoe;                         our mother hated                         so many things                                                  tea was                                    rattlesnake venom to                                                                      her             I embraced it  ///             What did you drink, Marilyn? I saw you only with a Coke or a glass of wine in your hand? Our mother whom you felt damaged you / your life       spirals, the twisting iridescent birds               fly at me now                       scintillating, spinning                                      I blink (Our mother drank many cups of coffee with cream a day.) Our sad mother                                    I blink                                    and tell it to go back to our childhood                                    of muddy little shoes from walking in                                    the spider-filled orange groves. There, the damaging must have Begun  / she                                    loving me so much                                                                       more                                                                       than you. I wish there had been more stories like the one about the origin of her disliking tea             at 17, she went to celebrate being made teacher             of the one-room school she had attended and             graduated from at her retiring teacher s             home, she was served for the first time   tea, she             being from a German coffee-drinking family.             Our mother hated it but politely choked it down.hated             Would never again touch a drop of the             poisonous beverage. From that story, we learned that our mother ritualized hating something   expected ushating to admire her for it.                         I took                         that negative pattern                         and spun it until I could have cloth enough for an eloquent garment. Perhaps the lesson simply made you feel yourself            helpless         ragged                      torn I never saw you that way, Marilyn, though perhaps incomplete. I pour a cup of Assam. Take a sip,             let it wash through my mouth,                         down my age-damaged throat, think of you sitting with me in your Southern California  backyard one May morning next to the camellia bush. I, as always with a cup of tea in my hand. You, smoking. I left all my family   you were part of it    left California and reinvented myself, even mythologized myself as a tan  California Girl.  You did not become an artist or a poet. I suppose that s why you felt damaged. If only you knew how much imagination and sacrifice it took for me to get away.                         So many small things                                    can save us                                              from the damage you talked of. For me, drinking that first cup of Orange Pekoe and making tea my drink      risking rattlesnake poison with every steaming cup, a tiny emblem of a rebellion I still try to practice. You left us so quickly, Marilyn, and without any warning this January, your house full of cancelled aspirations   glass bowls, and cylinders, and huge globes filled with sea scallop shells             you combed the California seashores to                          find, collecting these empty shells, washed free of their biological life.                                 Out of the ocean: we two different daughters of a sailor.   april 3 april 3april 3 The spinning                      the scissors               the measuring and thus our lives are given out from the heavens, with unfair allotments and varied, unaccountable fates, born when we are, and to whom you would have prevailed in an age where women had to spin, weave the material, cut it into britches and dresses, undergarments and sheets, sew and keep clean, warm, and comfortable a household full or a castle full / men children, hired hands, maidservants   you would have done it so well. But you would have died young in such a world    diabetes, asthma, chronic bronchial infections even in the 21st century where you lived to be 76       a world where all your skills were plied as             substitute for being an artist.                       When I asked you a year ago, not knowing that you would die this January, what you would most like to have, if money were not the object                since clearly all your measuring, cutting, and sewing             had been for economical reasons,             not art    you thought for a bit, raising your chin.  A swimming pool in my backyard. One I could step into every morning, swim, float   maybe in the afternoon I d go for a dip. Many evenings, I think,  she said to me.                     Longing for some ocean?  In our portrait, if someone paints it, she will be  sitting in a scallop shell, her many jars of seashells behind her head. I will be invisible, except for the spinning  murmuration of birds that radiates             past me.  They read at her funeral, a poem from her journal about lying on the beach, the sand embracing her. How much she loved it / felt safe, felt released. Oh, Marilyn, all those seashells emptied of their living fleshy occupants. (the ugly parts that die and rot) now glorious empty rooms             in which to live an imaginary life,                         to decorate, to create beauty,              spaces to live                         a different life. What is left but your desires, locked in glass, and an image of you walking your beloved beaches, hands  full of seashells, your footprints measured, then quickly filled  with the tidal flow.   april 4 april 4april 4 my spinning,              a whirlpool of faceted moving lights                         Everything is Numbers! down into a vortical glare that replaces             my own mind s desire                          Everything is Numbers! Everything is Numbers! floating down             like the crow s                         onyx feather the 8             of spades                         random card appearing             last week                         over gravel 8 legs on a spider,             the arachnid so many people seem to             fear, yet I lose track of time, stare into the wall             or any space to replace real images with my imaginary             ones, some random spider, who spins my fate Crazy Eights, the child card game Marilyn and I played pieces of eight, the dollar of             pirate Spain   our childhood in Orange County 8, a vertical infinity sign             everything is numbers / youris                         fire opal that Daddy brought to you from India, and our mother paid a jeweler to set it into a ring. You wore the ring more than sixty years. I suppose it was on your finger at death spinning,     spinning to scintillate and iridesce             We never had nice shoes.   april 5 april 5april 5 Easter Sunday. You and I always dyed Easter eggs together, our mother busy at her forty-hour-a-week bookkeeper s job. I  was intrigued with the colors, but they never turned out so bright when coloring the eggs. You, the artist, were interested in the designs to transfer onto the eggs, cartoons, bunnies, chicks. We kept our eggs separated from each other, put them in separate bowls, neither caring for the other s creation. Still we felt connected, even joyful, on those few holiday projects. Not enough to make us friends. My unwillingness to be like our classmates embarrassed you. You chose invisibility in school, rather than being known as  Diane s Sister.   That unwillingness to be like others  was what made me a poet. So many little things, but that early decision of yours, not to understand why I wanted to be weird, is what made you make so  many other small choices, preventing you  from becoming an artist.  Look away,  our mother said to us, when there were ugly things confronting us.  I could not do that. You blame our mother, yet it was you who decided to look away, even though it meant not seeing the whole world, even if meant you didn t become an artist. Poverty, of course, was the reason we never had nice shoes.   april 6 april 6april 6 All numbers have disappeared                         instead             there are mushrooms             fungi that has always seemed             more artful than tasty             Sipping a cup of tea / soothes me             as the mushrooms in a veloute sauce             never could.             I feel stymied / a rider             with no horse. I want only to watch             the stories unfold / the secret stories about why             you chose to marry and have children / whywhy             I did not / the stories                                     I try to banish             blot out, replace with the diamond             dog. A murmuration of iridescent starlings,              and the spider of eight,              twirling on its silk line, projecting infinity      artart             is made when you subject yourself             to the unacceptable, then dredge             yourself out,                                     find a mineral replacement:             infinity             iridescer             irised feather             scintillater                         a crystalline body whirls             releasing me from             the history, the stories it s             so hard to tell. Until recent years, my sister and I either ignored or disliked each other. We fought continuously as children. I have in my wrist a black bump that protrudes near a vein.                                     It s the point of a pencil that broke off and penetrated my wrist as we struggled for the long yellow weapon. A pencil, the weapon of a writer. But there was  no bleeding, no seeming-wound to be dressed.  We never told our Mother, both too ashamed of our brutality. I ve never asked a doctor about it, the pencil lead encapsulated in my wrist. Nor ever spoken of it to anyone. I always wonder that so much must remain a secret? Why             we never had nice shoes.   april 7 april 7april 7 Young Marilyn, Old Marilyn. there are places on this planet where I find it hard to detect any beauty therefore, silence                         No nice shoes.   april 8 april 8april 8 there is silence   april 9 april 9april 9 Drinking a blend of traditional Darjeeling with a touch of Ceylon / this tea takes me back to a Viennese visit, drinking this very tea in the afternoon while my friend, Jonathan, ate their famous Sacher torte. The tea seemed particularly aromatic                 lightly scented with oil of bergamot             and a hint of genuine Bourbon vanilla.  Wishing for the moment in the past to reappear. I didn t know the tea from the Sacher Hotel was as famous as the cake                                 until I found in my Upton Tea catalogue                                 a listing for  Scented Darjeeling                                  under the heading  Earl Grey Blends  This tea, any cup of tea! Hard to believe. no! Sad tono! think my Mother almost spat out her first taste of tea. What worldly thing must I touch to bring Marilyn back into my sedate life, my sister Marilyn who died in January?  Her hand   I d like to imagine timidly touching her       hand   Marilyn s hand.             Her right hand on which she wore the fire opal ring.                         In that hand she d be holding a cigarette. Smoke and fire makes me think of her                not water, though it was that Pacific ocean                          filled with seashells                                     that she was in touch with. My old hands, not really like hers at all. She had big hands for shaping things,             while mine are small,      like birds.

One of them grants you the ability to forecast the future; another wrenches your tongue from your mouth, changes you into a bird precisely because you have been given this gift. The gods are generous   in this way. I learned to avoid danger, avoid fear, avoid excitement, these the very triggers that prompt my wings from their resting place deep inside. And so, I avoided fights, avoided everything really. In the locker room, I avoided other boys,   all the while intently studying that space between their shoulder blades, patiently looking for the tell-tale signs, looking to find even one other boy like me, the wings buried but there nonetheless. I studied them from a distance.   When people challenge a god, the gods curse them with the label of madness. It is all very convenient. And meanwhile, a god took the form of a swan and raped a girl by the school gates. Another took the shape of an eagle to abduct a boy   from the football field. Mad world. And what about our teachers? Our teachers expected us to sit and listen. In Theology, there was a demon inside each of us; in History, the demons among us. So many demons   in this world. Who among us could have spoken up against the gods, the gods who continued living among us? They granted wishes and punishments much the way they always had. Very few noticed them casually taking the shape of one thing or another.  

First sew yourself into a pom pom mushroom Strut across the thirstland past faerie lights Shout complaints inside volcanic mancaves Scout for the last unlocated spring of ylem Then plait a cottage out of kestrel fluff Stir potato eyes into a vat of dislocated feelings Write a luculent novel five winters long Till dismay ferments enough nuclear energy to power Your moon buggy beyond the nacaret fields Stopping only to gather the pollen of the Umbiferous True Then plunge over cliffs sporting moth wings Dropping to the bottommost of the besprinkled sea And make your way up through the rain shadow On two cat feet in hostile territory All the while you compose a callithumpian song To nail a ritual within the astrobleme So bend dragons and constellate your enemies Fox on your shoulder spend a month sun-grazing A hundred hawks exploding before your stride Which will bring you luck on this godawful day You must make a new life by yourself like all Lurching tellurians stuck in eviternity

In a life below decks in a great ship, windowless, butterflies in lamplight are moving as they move. Fish swim indifferently inside their bowl, two men   toss a ball, each to each, as the ship speeds, head- long ahead, and nothing's driven back to the stern since to go with this motion is to be moored in port.   From the tallest mountain at the mind s white pole a cannon fires its charges into space, progressive speed, till one ball, by falling, flies, by flying, falls.   Now the surfer catches a wave of frozen light and rides it motionless to an impossible shore where he reckons sand the particles of his path:   and twins, one traveled from earthbound earth, the other staying home, meet again after years, each to the other younger from when he left.   The cat in its dire box keeps equally live and dead, the poison released, should hammer shatter flask when the atom decays, which it may not, or it may.   You, who chose two ways equally at once, circuit the conferences, meetings fueled by enigma, mixing with the eminent and their sidereal regard,   your morning Masses before library and lab.All outcomes must be possible in the system Schr dinger.All outcomes must be possible in the system In your life's chosen box, this con-celebration.  

     Fake Hula for Alien Tiki, 2014 Fake Hula for Alien Tiki, 2014Fake Hula for Alien Tiki

We mourn the broken things, chair legs wrenched from their seats, chipped plates, the threadbare clothes. We work the magic of glue, drive the nails, mend the holes. We save what we can, melt small pieces of soap, gather fallen pecans, keep neck bones for soup. Beating rugs against the house, we watch dust, lit like stars, spreading across the yard. Late afternoon, we draw the blinds to cool the rooms, drive the bugs out. My mother irons, singing, lost in reverie. I mark the pages of a mail-order catalog, listen for passing cars. All day we watch for the mail, some news from a distant place.

Yes, I wanted them to levitate. Unfortunately, I hadn't a leg to stand on. Cut-out camels plodded across the blackboard's high sill. Yet the desert below refused to unfurl its mica wings. When I asked them to try to remember, to release a soap bubble from their marvelous arsenal of wands, they resisted. They lined up, suspicious in individual spotlights. The fountain inside the scissored palm could only rise so high, maybe just a trumpeted C. Which is high, but not like those huge blue dreams that used to float by, shot from cloud-atomizers, the original public breeze on its back in the grass. Let's try to guess who or what is being borne up by this caravan of thin- skinned humps, a-bulge, inoculated? I tell you every one has a rider, a crop. It's been done this way for some time. If we pause here by the pillars of sand, up to our poet-knees in anarchy, won't each gulp of hoarded water from the toppled monument be sweeter passed hand to hand in the sun-colored dipper? Up to our thighs in it now, and spared what drills it- self into the rock daily, so it can claim to know zero after zero, and make that nothing into a sound like silent bells, split parched hooves, plodding.  

I sent him from home hardly more than a child. Years later, he came back loving avocados. In the distant kitchen where he'd flipped burgers and tossed salads, he'd mastered how to prepare the pear-shaped fruit. He took a knife and plied his way into the thick skin with a bravado and gentleness I'd never seen in him. He nudged the halves apart, grabbed a teaspoon and carefully eased out the heart, holding it as if it were fragile. He took one half, then the other of the armadillo- hided fruit and slid his spoon where flesh edged against skin, working it under and around, sparing the edible pulp. An artist working at an easel, he filled the center holes with chopped tomatoes. The broken pieces, made whole again, merged into two reconstructed hearts, a delicate and rare surgery. My boy who'd gone away angry and wild had somehow learned how to unclose what had once been shut tight, how to urge out the stony heart and handle it with care. Beneath the rind he'd grown as tender and mild as that avocado, its rubies nestled in peridot, our forks slipping into the buttery texture of unfamiliar joy, two halves of what we shared.

Supervises over the teatable our voluble hostess The passing round of titterings and toasties. Her glass-eyed friends, confidence's make-and-breaks, Give each in series gobbets of another's cakes. Dough drips into their tight triangular shoes. Their mouths give vent to evil-smelling news Keep their minds pure, make mental products crisper, With speaking eyeball rolls and the not too improper whisper. Fawn-eyed, the daughter, a gossip apprentice, Festoons gilt malice on her unmalicious twenties. Holiday smarmed the manureminded ephebus Sees in every skirt lubricity's rebus. Sex is their unknown god, with neither purity nor pox, To whom they genuflect whenever they enjoy their shocks. A little of everything, is the note they strike, The only limitation, what they think they do not like. Always they suffer inexpressible injustices, Making their own beds, these amateur Procrusteses, But expect their maids to lie in them. The middle classes Must have some defence against the vulgar masses. They have no use for idle gossips that scarify: But in their own leisure get together to verify Rumours of rationalists, use of contraceptives, Probable bastards, hope of their proving defectives (Details being perquisites of good detectives). This of course for the parish's sake. These long nose weevils Seek knowledge of others', as expression of their own, evils: And naught escapes being twisted and messed, Their own souls included, on matters of interest. Ignorant, superficial, malignant, self-deceived, Ashamed to bear, but proud to be bereaved, Devoted to truth's medals, but dismayed to see its flesh  Babies are born to them in prams and cr ches. Lip-honouring peace, by their indignant whispers Others they desecrate, their own insure, in their smug vespers. At mattins for their own sins pray to be forgiven, Revelling in others while walking home from heaven. Martrylike suffer for transgressions of the parish, Or say they do, particularly the most garish. But humbly at their bedside never hope that Jesus has destroyed Others' misfortunes wholly, lest themselves be unemployed. Such and so balsting are their faded Joys Which Time, nor Sickness, never quite destroys. Balder and balder every haircut Cutting a caper as lewd as he dare cut, Quasiphilosophically Capricorn carouses Ill at ease in such respectable houses, The disinherited soul of an atrabilious Semi self-deprecating paterfamilias. With many eyeglitters at women's legs in stockings And at the schoolboys' furtive corybantic eyecockings, His Bacchanalian belly he wobbles like a sack with metaphysical justification as Dionysiac, And ungenteel jokes undoubtedly due to his strabismus Distorting even the quaint festivities of Christmas. Remembering in the artificial afternoon Old days when Pan his saxophonic tune Under the ilex played, and how the figwood image Nimbly swayed in the nights of lustful scrimmage, And how in pleased surprise he uttered several Eurekas At finding the gross fungus Ithyphallus Impudicus. With him his father's hair his father's scalp reveals Commensurate, with scratching too much during silent meals, With virgin's blood the holly on the wall Drips. As from Druid branches fail to fall Light, intense pearl juices from alabaster fitting, The proper tight-drawn hostess cuts unwitting Symbols of fertility from Christmas cake. All jollity Is fastened down. Only innocent frivolity Saturnalia is allowed in houses of good quality. Tiddledywog. Meh, meh. The door bursts open wide The Sunday china stands up horrified.Tiddledywog. Meh, meh. All he has ever rememberedTiddledywog. Meh, meh. All he has ever remembered Bulges out like a plaster panel badly distempered. Tiddledywog. Meh, membrum caprinum erexit: Culpabat, alia aliam, quia ipsa conspexit. Tiddledywog. Tiddledywog. Tiddledywog. First he puts under the mat Persian cat and Pekinese dog. Then the tables' and chairbacks' torselling Smashes, and piles on potsherds of Worcester porcelain. Tiddledywog. Tiddledywog. Forefeet dangling like clappers Dancing about he grips the frightened flapper's Flaxen coils, throws to the ground and violates her. Which done she becomes he: he hates her, And turning on the boy, knocks his eyes out, Strips him, and using sinewy tail as a knout Flogs the boy till he eddies and faints. And the mother faints, Whom Capricorn props up upon the chintz And bathing her forehead with cold milk and tea Reverses coldness that used to be. But when she recovers, recovers himself and batters The woman to death. This seems to mend matters. Next pausing somewhat incommoded by his toils, The carpets, cushions, colour schemes he soils. Last in fierce memory of dislocate desire The house itself he dislocates with fire. Scatters the redhot imitation coals Over this mortuary of human souls. The imitation furniture goes up in smoke And well fired china serves as admirable coke. Like wood distilled that dribbles clammily Oozes the ectoplasm of his burning family. Various vermicular disseminations Germinating from his character's past emanations, Wriggle until he tramples them. This action Causes him an electric satisfaction. But as he leaves the drawing-room for the servants' hall To seize the housemaid ere the whole place fall He, bleating with dismay, or recognition rather, Finds himself facing himself as his own father. Incestuous terror tempts him to do patricide: But this he cannot, lest it turn out suicide: So forfeiting this chance of lovely pain, Since man once killed can not have joy of killing self again, And since the air is gradually overheating, With slight discomfort in his merry bleating, A muffler from the hall veiling him from being stark, He leaves the house to meditate, quite decent, in the Park. Attend the coda. Hardly out he passes Ere the charred, smashed, cadaverous wilting masses, Shape back to chintz and gilded wood and scones. The ancient house of Capricorn & Sons Stands unassailable in statu quo, Unconscious of the wiles of wurrico. Immaculate the virgin hopes her stare Has an enlightened but offended air: The boy unscarred eyes still the cakes and knees Smiling as sticky as the things he sees: The hostess volubly goes prattling on Deadly and regular as Gatling gun: With spurious teeth and with triangular feet The friends tread on each other's corns and eat: While Capricorn, morose from losing od, Defends the Empire and the Will of God.  

I forgot how lush and electrified it was with you. The shaggy fragrant zaps continually passing back and forth, my fingertip to your clavicle, or your wrist rubbing mine to share gardenia oil. We so purred like dragonflies we kept the mosquitoes away and the conversation was heavy, mother-lacerated childhoods and the sad way we'd both been both ignored and touched badly. Knowing that being fierce and proud and out and loud was just a bright new way to be needy. Please listen to me, ohPlease listen to me,  what a buzz! you're the only one you're the only one I can tell. Even with no secret,I can tell.  I could come close to your ear with my mouth and that was ecstasy, too. We barely touched each other, we didn't have to speak. The love we made leapt to life like a cat in the space between us (if there ever was was  space between us), and looked back at us through fog. Sure, this was San Francisco, it was often hard to see. But fog always burned off, too, so we watched this creature to see if it knew what it was doing. It didn't.

And when they bombed other people s houses, we   protested but not enough, we opposed them but not   enough. I was in my bed, around my bed America   was falling: invisible house by invisible house by invisible house.   I took a chair outside and watched the sun.   In the sixth month of a disastrous reign in the house of money   in the street of money in the city of money in the country of money, our great country of money, we (forgive us)   lived happily during the war.

The few strings snap and pull the doll s flimsy limbs for his last ballet, an American piece, arms flung like a flamingo s wings, his sashay a flame s undulation, dip, wave, head snapped into a skygaze, a pained grin white beneath the doorway s light, legs braiding in the climactic pirouette, convulsive shoulders rolling, the body s final drift smooth as a sun-baked bloodflake flecked off a rhino s horn, the gored corpse sweet meat to a smoky gauze of ravenous flies humming and blood- sucking tiny gunpowder-singed hearts, charred kiss marks, until, at last, the strings go slack, the doll sprawls in a crippled collapse, his face half lit, the puppeteers praising this black ghost s steel-pierced, last dying quake, the dead sweet and clean, and that last wheeze, an escaping, you ve heard it, drops the floodgates for the real ghosts, a bouqet of them, a blitzkrieg of black orchids roaring. And they blaze.  

I act like I know it all. But you, you act like you know it all. We can t both be wrong. Still, neither of us should have children. Your head s in a sack. In a sack with a snake with two heads. And my head is even older than our initial calculations implied. I know many names for sitting cross-legged, none for never getting up again. You, you speak as if you just checked, but it s not even up to you. Fox pulls a rabbit out of a duck and keeps the wound-up hounds upwind. Hedgehog carries one trick around like a small booth atop an elephant. And both of us, elephant and booth, carry from birth what can t be cast off by dying. How can we corrupt the young? The young don t even know we exist.

I mean, who isn t heating up for the next life on the order of Antoine Doinel, or a pot of unsweetened chocolate. Beginning with a single window and the sense that what we know outgrows everything except a headache or the desk dreaming on its own. It doesn t matter if being upright brings living beings closer to the lives they lead (one s 26-year-old self smokes a cigar but isn t a desperado) nor is beginning a poem with someone s wrath a means of stepping outside the Self as though volume equalled flesh tones   any more than the Epic of the Roast Chicken with Lyonnaise Potatoes and Greens takes over the above-ground, colors and smells aside.

After the cocoon I was in a human body instead of a butterfly s. All along my back there was great pain   I groped to my feet where I felt wings behind me, trying to tilt me back. They succeeded in doing so after a day of exertion. I called that time, overwhelmed with the ghosts of my wings, sleep. My thoughts remained those of a caterpillar    I took pleasure in climbing trees. I snuck food into all my pains. My mouth produced language which I attempted to spin over myself and rip through happier and healthier. I d do this every few minutes. I d think to myselfWhat made me such a failure?What made me such a failure? It s all a little touchingly pathetic. To live like this, a grown creature telling ghost stories, staring at pictures, paralyzed for hours. And even over dinner or in bed    still hearing the stories, seeing the pictures    an undertow sucking me back into myself. I m told to set myself goals. But my mind doesn t work that way. I, instead, have wishes for myself. Wishes aren t afraid to take on their own color and life    like a boy who takes a razor from a high cabinet puffs out his cheeks and strips them bloody.

One against the other across the fleetingly infinite field: that dry crackling of pallid corn stalks clacking comes close to it. behind them mountains range like steppes between the tiers of fog they coddle. it's autumn coming close again and you need to compare this one to autumns past, recall the other sputters of color too good to last. something you need to say, something you come close to: wind in its limitless visits  especially in fall when it cleans the overblown trees  wind in possession of you says it best. but you go on anyway, trying to pen the breeze: this fall phenomenon different from summer's in its macabre celebration of the lifeless, in its forever rewritten memory of what comes next. sorrel leaves swirling in a whirlwind mimic your own compulsive repetition, its own circle of yearning so close to a kind of comfort. quickening conversations of geese flocking south chill through your thin skin: behind it a choir of silence undefined rows you closer to what you'll never forget, what you almost remember this time. closer to its name. the heart overtaken. the bare staves waving at boughs' ends, the musical red wings: something they almost say, more like a sense hunched in darkness, an ache, a suspicion: every time, closer to it, closer. hear hard light on the hillside flatten the visible scale into two dimensions, and you're in love with the flatted third: the way it breaks you down, over and over, to mean you are alive. the way you rub it in the wound that you never come close to wanting to close  as if you could scrub away the whirling of everything else and come down like snow to the center, the eye, so close to the purity of knowing inside this present pain, that searing white place without wind or words.

In a movie I have never seen: a small-town drunk stumbles into a beam of light & wakes up convinced he was abducted by aliens, convinced a hole opened in the sky & swallowed him   said they did something strange to his body some kind of experiment, said a hole opened, said cold light cauterized him shut, redefined that red theory, chrome instrument turned him into a skinless puzzle, a scrambled egg sealed back into its shell. Madness, too, can be accumulative. When my blood seemed uncontrollable, ran messy with pulp down their fingers, my cousins finally left the room, laughing closing the basement door behind them.

Since kindergarten my son's class has practiced for when a lion enters the building. They have a safe wall they crouch against. A closet some of the children fit into. The lion roams wild in the hall. Races up the stairs. When the lion is at the door they are taught to think of emptiness. Darkness. A real lion not some yellow-furred animal.  

On a scale of Lustrous to Sockeye, Fishscale to Fire-Dot. Not Ichthyosis: Lichen. Fruiting bodies in a calcareous spot. Goldspeck. Blushing. O the diffuse eruption of dazzling papul ! Usher the Wild Lichen. Usher spring and the furfuraceous scurf recurs. The Brain-Scaled (the hairline cracked). The Blue-Blistered, the Earth-Wrinkled. Neither Strophulus nor stoppable. Like wildfire rash the crustose rush of successive crops. Tundra Sulphur, circumpolar, the snowy excoriations. So squats the Dog Lichen, the Freckle Pelt. Cobblestoned, chronic, the not contagious.

Know what the almost-gone dandelion knows. Piece by piece The body prayers home. Its whole head a veil, a wind-blown bride. When all the mothers gone, frame the portraits. Wood spoon over Boiling pot, test the milk on your own wrist. You soil, sand, and mud grown bride. If you miss your stop. Or lose love. If even the medicine hurts too. Even when your side-eye, your face stank, still, your heart moans bride.bride Fuck the fog back off the mirror. Trust the road in your name. Ride Your moon hide through the pitch black. Gotsta be your own bride. Burn the honey. Write the letters. What address could hold you? Nectar arms, nectar hands. Old tire sound against the gravel. Baritone bride. Goodest grief is an orchard you know. But you have not been killed Once. Angel, put that on everything. Self. Country. Stone. Bride.

We were running out of breath, as we ran out to meet ourselves. We were surfacing the edge of our ancestors  fights, and ready to strike. It was difficult to lose days in the Indian bar if you were straight. Easy if you played pool and drank to remember to forget. We made plans to be professional   and did. And some of us could sing so we drummed a fire-lit pathway up to those starry stars. Sin was invented by the Christians, as was the Devil, we sang. We were the heathens, but needed to be saved from them   thin chance. We knew we were all related in this story, a little gin will clarify the dark and make us all feel like dancing. We had something to do with the origins of blues and jazz I argued with a Pueblo as I filled the jukebox with dimes in June, forty years later and we still want justice. We are still America. We know the rumors of our demise. We spit them out. They die soon.

What did we suffer for? why did we flee our houses as if we had been hostages at our own tables? Even free, we were not free, we kept breaking down in thrift stores, our eyes tearing in bins of glasses taken from the faces of the dead; disoriented and dizzy as crows swarming the corpses of our own hearts, in the aisles of the department stores filled with the glitter of plenty, we kept spilling coffee on ourselves. Why are we forever afraid of bathtubs, of water hitting us in the face like the invisible stoning of an anonymous crowd, why does buying makeup make us feel guilty, why do we eat our food like thieves? Why do we sneak our friends in the back door and make our love climb up a tree? Why do our lies nest within one another like diminishing dolls? Why do we jump when the smallest child pushes open a door? Why are we afraid of the whistling of teapots? Who s coming in to read over our shoulders our most secret thoughts, who s clinging to our roofs like a demon? Why is his cheerfulness even more frightening than his anger? Why does my hope burn like the scar of a burn on my breast? Why are you an eye floating in a pool of dead water, blue; and unable to breathe? Why do we keep asking why? How do we know how to stop it if we don t know why it began? How can we unravel so much violence followed by so much lie? How will we know when it s ever over? or believe it will ever stop?  

Was it Pascal who said  Almost all our misery has come from not being able to remain alone in our rooms ? Baudelaire thought it might have been, but was not sure. And let s take a look at that  almost  which I m very glad is there. I can think of lots of misery that had nothing to do with my not having been alone in my room. When I get a rejection email on a train for a piece of work I had high hopes for is one example. Or to go way back, when I returned home to find my white mouse dead when I was eleven or twelve. Or to take a mundane example, when a plane I m booked on is twelve hours delayed, while I hang about the airport.I have never had a huge problem with solitude, it is true. As a child I read voraciously, and would find some hidden corner to lurk with my book. The game of golf is one where one can enjoy being alone, especially very early on a beautiful morning. The time when I most felt alone was when the missionaries came to my school and we all had to endure a silent retreat for three days. At the end of that time  I felt like one of those astronauts in films who have to stay on the moon for months.Baudelaire claimed his friend the Devil loved bleak, solitary places where the spirit of murder and lust was more likely to ignite. He decided that this was not really a danger for most of us, though, only for those idle, fanciful folk prone to enigmas and dreaming. The type of person who should most avoid being alone is a chatterbox or maybe a television pundit. But what s to stop these people being verbose in their own company? Did Crusoe, for example, stay quiet on his island before Friday came? According to Elizabeth Bishop in her great poem,  Crusoe in England,  he did not.And in order to write that poem, Ms. Bishop needed to be alone. This did not stop her from cooking meals and inviting friends to help her eat the food and drink wine with her. After this, probably the next morning, she went back to the poem and her solitude.I feel the French maybe exaggerate the benefits of  being alone. That philosopher and writer Jean-Paul Sartre for example, his play Huis-clos with its famous line  L enfer, c est les autres.  Yes, we all know how annoying other people often are, and how strong the urge to escape from them can be. But the two characters Vladimir and Estragon in Beckett s Waiting for Godot show that even in an absurdist setting companionship has its importance. It s said Beckett got his inspiration for this play from one or other of two versions of Caspar David Friedrich s painting Two Men Contemplating the Moon which he saw on a trip to Germany in 1936 or  37. In both versions of the painting one of the men has his hand on the other man s shoulder, a sign of companionship if ever there was one.Huis-closWaiting for GodotTwo Men Contemplating the MoonBaudelaire quotes the French philosopher and moralist Jean de la Bruy re (or Delabruy re, as the man signed himself),  What a great misfortune we cannot be alone,  as if to chastise anyone who wants to plunge into a crowd or go into a busy bar. What about the great French word fraternit , the third of the three words that were the rallying cry of the Revolution? I want to close this by giving another quote from de la Bruy re:  Out of difficulties grow miracles.  I prefer this one. Anyone in an awkward social situation should dwell on that.fraternit 

When you know that vore means eat,vore eat you will know that insectivores feedinsectivores             on grasshoppers, moths, and butterflies,             mosquitoes, bees, and plain-old flies. When you know that carni means meat,carnimeat you will know that carnivores eatcarnivores             snakes and lizards, deer and lamb,             carrion, birds, fish, and ham. When you know that herb means plant,herbplant you will know that herbivores CAN'Therbivores              eat anything that moves on a foot,              just foods that spring up from a root. When you know that omni means all, you will know that omnivores call Everything             they can suck or chew              sometimes even me or you  food.                        just foods that spring up from a root. When you know that omni means all,omni all you will know that omnivores callomnivores  Everything             they can suck or chew              sometimes even me or you  food.             sometimes even me or you  food.            

Borne forward by extended increments.                        Crawling waterward from this weed wilted shore. Like small furred voles skittering inward, taking little                        grounded, mirrored steps: Like this, intervals of ice ridge and rime the pond rim. By night. As if                        by dreaming ice might cast its million limbs over that surface above. Its frozen tincture                        outfolding farther, farther unfurling across. By dawn: The moonspread scales then a foregone conclusion.                        Constructed, transmutable truth: All day ice shrinking from the light, reconsidering.                        And still, in leaving, leaving its lingering doubt, pale shadow of wingspan edgebound.                        Near. Then again in dark the cold falling, fallen to glow on the meniscus, ice groping forward with more                        sliding white. Ice: Its own logic, growing: Its horizontal precipice. Its glass                        carapace. Night's cold and hoary frost. Vaster still till all its heirs' outstretched                        tips interslip, imprint with their ferny whorls an entire span between lands.                        To travel that unthinkably far! And then, having reached to cry out more room! crackmore room                        like a shell, heave between its crushing shores. But which pressing which? And what boundary                        divides water from ice, what self solidifies against self, which is water host or                        whore? Ice now in spring dissolving, dissolute reversal by increments retreating. Not I,                        alive, here mudnudged under eaves, forming my young egg by egg, mother's lasting bequest.                        To nest once in heat. To hatch and be born.  

Our loons still scull on the pewter calm of the lake, the chick having dodged the eagle one more day. The valorous drake and hen both held it between their bodies while the raptor circled. Reprieve. And here I am, old.   I stooped an hour ago to dump the pail of dace I'd trapped, then watched them scatter, the ones we hadn't hooked through their dorsals for bait. Twenty or so now swim at large  still prey, but not to us,   Who are headed home in the morning. I m poised to throw away this clutch of wilting black-eyed Susans picked wild by my wife of all these years to grace our painted metal table, where we lifted ladders of spine   from fat white perch, last supper. So here I am, this aging man who wants somehow to write only one love song after another. I pause at dusk, I blink, I toss Our dim bouquet into late summer s woods.  

but lake winds pick him up & blow him into the clouds. I married a dreamer. I wait. He stops to listen to the early lilac orchestra. He starts to change into blowy horizontal lake rain, then migrating red admirals.   I thinksay remember. I remember us. We chose the imaginal north/south somewhere between Bartlett Avenue and Jupiter, between Lake Michigan and the Aegean. Remember we drink Serbian Cosmos together, we eat squash blossoms and red snapper soup. We visit the Calatrava before bed. We nurture a magnetic field of words. I am   remembering you back. Remembering plays time. Thinking is all remembering. I remember our young bodies. I'm not finished with us. Remember that. If someone asks, "why is that lady out walking in that lake storm?" Tell them "months ago her husband went to the store in a blizzard & never came back." Tell them: "She can't stop looking for him. 

To push and push with raw pink claws like hands of shin. To tunnel my love through wet earth, wet stars   no one needs the underneath like me. I give you permission to grip me. To patrol the worm-drench of my thinking. To bite a worm s head and cure the rest as cache. Your flesh, my flesh, your dead as dead, buried like a feeling. To push through that wet, a scrum of worms whittling my skin like a premonition. To have pushed mountains into hills, ragged sooth from the slid wall of healing.  Nothing,  said the suicide,  is as sad as recovery.  To work myself forward like a noun or an entry.

Working with one eye closed or heads buried under their drapes, they focus to preserve the drowned shell-hole, the salient's rubble of dead, the bleached bones of sepoys torn from the earth. Their stills haunt us: a stretcher piled with skulls at Cold Harbour, graves in a barren wood that in one hour's carnage lost its name to history and the world's memory of death. The worst has happened, they confirm the worst: but show us too the makeshift hospital, the sad errand of the hospital van among the ruins. Also enough of sky to suggest the infinity of angles, that behind sandbags, under the hostile towers someone is finding time for a wry note on bowel movements, an entry that affirms the loved salience of what is always there: flower of Auschwitz, bird of the Western Front.  

the first trees were felled and sailed in, wrecked, then slept an age in the northern sun, blackening to iron                    were found by horsemen leading their horses and raised as cloud s axles, rafters of night, a god s gates      were passed through, seen from miles off, rolled the sun and moon along their lintels, rooted, put out leaves                     for a second time creaked, tasted the rain, held the wind to their hearts while the horsemen streamed like their horses  manes into the dark, their fires black smudge in the subsoil, their bridles of gold underground      lived long, grew great                   were a second time felled, dressed                   were sharpened to stakes and raised as a fort by farmers who d followed their ploughs to the treeline for fuel to bake the pots their ashes were buried in with a scattering of grain like stars                 each small clay heaven still hangs in the earth      were overgrown, steered clear of      called dragon s ribs                    devil s cot                 were nested among, rotted down beside      harbored foxglove, eggshell owl pellet, primrose, honeycomb      were glazed, split                   put out buds of malachite, blossoms of salt, grew again, put out small translucent fruits named by the women who prized them teardrops, ice apples, clarities       were offered bread, dolls of woven grass, plaits of hair, coins with the obverse ground smooth, beads of  turquoise     twisted, straightened, filled with rooks, held again the wind to their hearts, creaked, scraped off the sunlight s scales with their leaves, were a grove, grew manes of lichen, were murmured under, gave counsel on still nights of open doorways the dead came through on horseback or shouldering flails or bearing chimes of ice apples                       gave shelter      were felled for it, their roots ripped up by a legion s engineers and left like brainstems rucked on the earth      were timber but the pit saws snarled in their rings of iron      broke teeth on the flints that welted their sapwood      were good for nothing, stacked, fired, marched away from, sucked up the flames, hissed, smoked, glowed blood- black, were tempered, twice- forged                     bided on site as battle-stain, in story as Head Wood      lay half-buried, grown over, still hot                   were stumbled upon by navigators, hit with hammers and rang until they were made lock gates to slam shut on the slow wet      grew green, slime- faced, knew runoff, weird particulates, held fast against drizzle s tonnage, the nudge and bonk of a bloater        were left stinking when the water died      stood strange in currents of deep grass, open wide      flexed, hungered once more for the light, bulged, branched, rived out of their lacquer, unfurled leaves of oilskin, shook down clots of blossom            lived long, grew great      weren t felled but walled in, roofed over, giving span to a farmhouse, hanging a hall from their outstretch, bracing floor after floor on their inosculating joists, which sang to a barefoot tread and were called home of shadows             heart of the wind     Lamanby

It was the dead center of summer, & anyone but us would ve been outside hours ago, flailing like a system of larks against the hydrant s icy spray. But a girl had her orders, & to disobey our mother was, in a sense, to invite one s own destruction, cause to pray that a god of mercy might strike first. So we lay, still as stars on the living room floor, poring over algorithms: divisors & dividends, quotientquotient the first synonym for resolution I ever learned, & would later come to love for its sound alone, how it reminded me, even then, of words like quantum & quotationquantum&quotationmark, both ways of saying nothingmark means what you think it means all the time. The observable universe hides behind its smooth obsidian dress, & all we can do is grasp at it in myths & figures, see what sticks, give all our best language to the void. What dark irony, these coy, child philosophers, theorizing how things break from the floor of a house where everything is more or less in flux, indeterminate as the color of the blood in a body. Or the speed at which I learned to obliterate the distance between myself & any given boy on the block, the optimal angle of the swing most likely to drop another kid cold in front of his crew, to square up, square off, & this too was a kind of education, the way my sister held both fists semi-adjacent, each an inch or so from her switchblade eyes, showed me the stance you take when the math doesn t quite shake out, so it s just you & the unknowns & the unknowns never win.

They so liked breast milk; Joanne fell asleep & leaked, the ants woke up, made the sweet climb. Others were surprised to find acidophilus, Soledad cleansing her inside sex   they made their way across her ivory sheets while she napped. Ah, the little guys were rejected by our sisters. But still, I feel sad that in my new lodgings there are no more glossy arrowheads to follow, sprinkle with baking powder, make a pretty cayenne path for over the once-food-strewn sill (they scent our past). They can carry their groceries bag-free: & ants shop in the honey cupboard, thirst like black hair being washed in a sink. Car-waxed black traffic jam   that s actual jam, strawberry. Once my curatorial staff. But let them go on strike. Those embodiments of intention; they don t sit around playing cards; perhaps they never play, never horse around. Hard-to-see-in-the-dark jet numbers on the radio dial. Perhaps there is no laughter in their chasm. Serious: but they re able to stand up on hind legs    a darling trick. I want to give them a little inkwell. A beachball. The number of communal legs alone exceeds the stars underground. They could be an orchestra. A single one looks in the mirror & sees a note. A quarter note. So many instincts massing as one. If I miss one little lover, do I miss them all?

Stranger, you who hide my love         In the curved cheek of a smile And sleep with her upon a tongue        Of soft lies that beguile,           Your paradisal ecstasy         Is justified is justified By hunger of the beasts beneath         The overhanging cloud             Who to snatch quick pleasures run              Before their momentary sun Be eclipsed by death. Lightly, lightly from my sleep         She stole, our vows of dew to break Upon a day of melting rain         Another love to take:            Her happy happy perfidy         Was justified was justified Since compulsive needs of sense          Clamour to be satisfied              And she was never one to miss              Plausible happiness Of a new experience. I, who stand beneath a bitter         Blasted tree, with the green life Of summer joy cut from my side         By that self-justifying knife,             In my exiled misery          Were justified were justified If upon two lives I preyed         Or punished with my suicide,            Or murdered pity in my heart            Or two other lives did part To make the world pay what I paid. Oh, but supposing that I climb         Alone to a high room of clouds Up a ladder of the time And lie upon a bed alone         And tear a feather from a wing And listen to the world below And write round my high paper walls         Anything and everything Which I know and do not know!

The idea was. At least in theory, Dust was a bad thing.   There was a bowl Of it. At another Point in time The conclusion Was reached That everything Was of it.   No season, no Nothing to measure To measure against So no love or hate. Left us without no Moorings or so my Father told me   Vanity tables of it? Isn t that what a vanity Table is for? What happens to As its failings accrue?   No mission but to be clean. Of itself. But existing (time) And problems there   The problem of now We are back here.   See the whole dust problem s No measure. All s dust, check. All s virtuous, check. So why not live it up then? And thus, YOLO etc. etc.   {These fok whirr pretty smart. Thing is, even in The dust bowl, the Idea, a very American One was that something Wasn t dust. I wasn t. The Bowl wasn t. The dust wasn t.   Since Ecclesiastes, Been trying this one on. (how s that working out for you?) One needn t be geologically Or for that matter Psychologically trained to Begin unpacking the diffident And sometimes strained Relation the nation holds with All that is vanity.

1 1 You said anyone could walk in with a pack of explosives as we passed through the crowds of tourists and school kids    under the glass-grid ceiling lit with sun. I was saying: She s our earth, our body, our sex,She s our earth, our body, our sex as we drifted down the halls of statues and colonnades and hunks of facades of Greek temples until we found room 22,  The Hellenistic World,  where a bronze face in a glass box on the wall stared back at us.Head from a bronze cult statueHead from a bronze cult statue of Anahita, a local goddess in the guise of Aphrodite (200 100 BC)200 100 BC) the text hung there in space   Found in Satala in NE Asia MinorFound in Satala in NE Asia Minor (Armenia Minor) a left hand holding drapery was found with the head  // and out of some bad Comedy Central joke, my iPhone buzzed with a flash news update about ISIS or ISIL, or whatever they called themselves that week   Temple of Baalshamin at Palmyra   blown up   Temple of Baalshamin at Palmyra   blown up    the phrase re-circled   blown up   blown up   2 2 and my head was back in the white van with the TV crew in  09 winding through the buttes and roadside gullies of the Syrian desert, to the Armenian memorial in Der Zor, before we went to Palmyra where I sat under 50-foot Corinthian columns    the corners chipped by wind and sand in late May when it hit 110 at noon and the sun melted the plastic rim of my cell phone    as our driver appeared out of nowhere with stacks of zaatar bread and Diet Cokes    we found some shade under a portico as the visionary pillars disappeared into blue sky.   3 3 Outside students were buzzing through the gates of UCL and the brown brick of Bloomsbury was lit up with sun after rain    inside the wunderkammer of Hans Sloane and the collectors who hauled their stuff from the Middle East    (What is the Middle East? my Turkish publisher asked an audience at NYU    Istanbul, Jerusalem, Mumbai, Srinagar?) you kept asking: What is year zero to us? Didn t our war destroy some temples and museums? I called the curator on the phone at the info desk to leave my complaint on the message machine about the signage:  Satala wasn t Armenia Minor/NE Asia Minor   Armenia MinorNE Asia Minor it was central Armenia /Anatolia   make correction.    4 4 What questions were we asking staring at the misinformation on the wall and the beautiful Armenian head of Anahit? Why was I back in Der Zor at the chapel digging Armenian bones out of the baked ground    scratching the marrow and dried mildew?   5 5 In the age of throat-slitting on Twitter the imperial shock and awe of burning Tigris    the lynching of Saddam on the internet, vanishing tomb of Jonah    which fetishized objects ... whose museum?   6 6 I m gazing at the head of Anahit   Armenian goddess of fertility and love    (no more local than the Brooklyn Bridge) staring at the green and red paint still speckled on her bronze head. I love her serpentine upper lip, her eyes of black space    I stare into the screw hole in her neck the two curlicues of hair on her forehead her august throat; her dense acanthine hair.

                                          I One among friends who stood above your grave I cast a clod of earth from those heaped there Down on the great brass-handled coffin lid. It rattled on the oak like a door knocker And at that sound I saw your face beneath Wedged in an oblong shadow under ground. Flesh creased, eyes shut, jaw jutting And on the mouth a grin: triumph of one Who has escaped from life-long colleagues roaring For him to join their throng. He's still half with us Conniving slyly, yet he knows he's gone Into that cellar where they'll never find him, Happy to be alone, his last work done, Word freed from world, into a different wood.                                            II But we, with feet on grass, feeling the wind Whip blood up in our cheeks, walk back along The hillside road we earlier climbed today Following the hearse and tinkling village band. The white October sun circles Kirchstetten With colours of chrysanthemums in gardens, And bronze and golden under wiry boughs, A few last apples gleam like jewels. Back in the village inn, we sit on benches For the last toast to you, the honoured ghost Whose absence now becomes incarnate in us. Tasting the meats, we imitate your voice Speaking in flat benign objective tones The night before you died. In the packed hall You are your words. Your listeners see Written on your face the poems they hear Like letters carved in a tree's bark The sight and sound of solitudes endured. And looking down on them, you see Your image echoed in their eyes Enchanted by your language to be theirs. And then, your last word said, halloing hands Hold up above their heads your farewell bow. Then many stomp the platform, entreating Each for his horde, your still warm signing hand. But you have hidden away in your hotel And locked the door and lain down on the bed And fallen from their praise, dead on the floor.                                            III (Ghost of a ghost, of you when young, you waken In me my ghost when young, us both at Oxford. You, the tow-haired undergraduate With jaunty liftings of the head. Angular forward stride, cross-questioning glance, A Buster Keaton-faced pale gravitas.gravitas Saying aloud your poems whose letters bit Ink-deep into my fingers when I set Them up upon my five-pound printing press:'An evening like a coloured photograph'An evening like a coloured photograph A music stultified across the water The heel upon the finishing blade of grass.')                                            IV Back to your room still growing memories   Handwriting, bottles half-drunk, and us   drunk   Chester, in prayers, still prayed for your 'dear C.', Hunched as Rigoletto, spluttering Ecstatic sobs, already slanted Down towards you, his ten-months-hence Grave in Athens   remembers Opera, your camped-on heaven, odourless Resurrection of your bodies singing Passionate duets whose chords resolve Your rows in harmonies. Remembers Some tragi-jesting wish of yours and puts 'Siegfried's Funeral March' on the machine. Wagner who drives out every thought but tears   Down-crashing drums and cymbals cataclysmic End-of-world brass exalt on drunken waves The poet's corpse borne on a bier beyond The foundering finalities, his world, To that Valhalla where the imaginings Of the dead makers are their lives. The dreamer sleeps forever with the dreamed.  

 Now, tell me one difference,  my sister says,  between Old English and New English.  Well, Old English has a word for our kind of people: ofermod, literallyofermod  overmind,  or  overheart,  or  overspirit,  often translated  overproud.  When the warrior Byrhtnoth, overfool, invited the Vikings across the ford at Maldon to fight his smaller troop at closer range, his overpride proved deadlier than the gold-hilted and file-hard swords the poet gleefully describes    and aren t we like that, high-strung and ofermod as our daddy and granddaddiesofermod and everybody else in our stiff-necked mountain town, always with something stupid to prove, doing 80 all the way to the head of the holler, weaving through the double lines; splinting a door-slammed finger with popsicle sticks and electrical tape; not filling out the forms for food stamps though we know we qualify. Sister, I ve seen you cuss rivals, teachers, doctors, bill collectors, lawyers, cousins, strangers at the red light or the Walmart; you start it, you finish it, you everything-in-between-it, whether it s with your fists, or a two-by-four, or a car door, and it doesn t matter that your foe s stronger, taller, better armed. I don t tell a soul when I m down to flour and tuna and a half-bag of beans, so you ve not seen me do without just to do without, just for spite at them who told us,  It s a sin to be beholden.  If you re Byrhtnoth lying gutted on the ground, speechifying at the troops he s doomed, then I m the idiot campaigner fighting beside his hacked-up lord instead of turning tail, insisting,  Mind must be the harder, heart the keener, spirit the greater, as our strength lessens.  Now, don t that sound familiar? We ve bought it all our lives as it s been sold by drunkards, bruisers, goaders, soldiers, braggers with a single code: you might be undermined, girl, but don t you never be undermod.undermod

Since it s just me here I ve found the back and stayed there most of the time, in rain and snow and the no-moon nights, dodging the front I used to put up like a yard gussied and groomed, all edged and flower-lined, my bottled life. Uncorked, I had a thought: I want the want I dreamed of wanting once, a quarter cup of sneak-peek at what prowls in the back, at what sings in the wet rag space behind the garage, back where the rabbits nest, where I smell something soupish, sour and dank and it s filled with weeds like rough cat tongues and the wind is unfostered, untended, now that it s just me here and I am so hungry for the song that grows tall like a weed grows, and grows. When I was a little girl my ma said a woman gets tired and sick of the front yard, of kissing the backside of a rose.

It is appropriate that I sing The song of the feet   The weight of the body And what the body chooses to bear Fall on me   I trampled the American wilderness Forged frontier trails Outran the mob in Tulsa Got caught in Philadelphia   And am still unreparated   I soldiered on in Korea Jungled through Vietman sweated out Desert Storm Caved my way through Afghanistan Tunneled the World Trade Center   And on the worst day of my life Walked behind JFK Shouldered MLK Stood embracing Sister Betty   I wiggle my toes In the sands of time Trusting the touch that controls my motion Basking in the warmth of the embrace Day s end offers with warm salty water   It is appropriate I sing The praise of the feet   I am a Black woman

If you find yourself half naked and barefoot in the frosty grass, hearing, again, the earth's great, sonorous moan that says you are the air of the now and gone, that says all you love will turn to dust, and will meet you there, do not raise your fist. Do not raise your small voice against it. And do not take cover. Instead, curl your toes into the grass, watch the cloud ascending from your lips. Walk through the garden's dormant splendor. Say only, thank you. Thank you.

When I push your button you fly off the handle, old skin and bones, black bat wing. We're alike, you and I. Both of us resemble my mother, so fierce in her advocacy on behalf of the most vulnerable child who'll catch his death in this tempest. Such a headwind! Sometimes it requires all my strength just to end a line. But when the wind is at my back, we're likely to get carried away, and say something we can never retract, something saturated from the ribs down, an old stony word like ruin. You're what roofruin I have, frail thing, you're my argument against the whole sky. You're the fundamental difference between wet and dry.

Just enough rain an hour ago to give the wispy dry grass some hope, turning it green instantly. This place has been abandoned, the old faith overgrown, confused by brambles, and in these hard times, its upkeep cut from the budget. But we walk, soaked to the knees, making our slow pilgrimage among gravestones, speaking blurred names back into the world.

Dog bone, stapler, cribbage board, garlic press      because this window is loose lacks suction, lacks grip. Bungee cord, bootstrap, dog leash, leather belt      because this window had sash cords. They frayed. They broke. Feather duster, thatch of straw, empty bottle of Elmer's glue      because this window is loud its hinges clack open, clack shut. Stuffed bear, baby blanket, single crib newel      because this window is split. It's dividing in two. Velvet moss, sagebrush, willow branch, robin's wing      because this window, it's pane-less. It's only a frame of air.

when i say pre-exposure prophylaxis you thinkeasy fix. greek in origin. an act of guarding.easy fix. greek in origin. an act of guarding.east of here a small temple.east of here a small temple.inside parishioners strip nudeinside parishioners strip nudeas armless statues, their stoneas armless statues, their stonegenitals hardening under a chemist s glare.genitals hardening under a chemist s glare.the garden out front fecund & tended.the garden out front fecund & tended.the garden inside bare.the garden inside bare. when i say tenofovir disoproxil you thinkchemical names. saint names. names without origin.chemical names. saint names. names without origin.an unpronounceable string of letters. the generic namesan unpronounceable string of letters. the generic namesof petty angels. the drug s molecular makeup applied inof petty angels. the drug s molecular makeup applied in& around the eyes & lips. the names of viruses & blind trials.& around the eyes & lips. the names of viruses & blind trials.the kept-vial of love. the unknowable side effects of blood.the kept-vial of love. the unknowable side effects of blood. when i say oral emtricitabine you thinkonce a day swallow a small sunonce a day swallow a small sun& all hymn in you comes undone& all hymn in you comes undonethe way a lit match deads the smellthe way a lit match deads the smellof a public bathroomof a public bathroom when i say nucleotide analog reverse transcriptase inhibitor you thinkthirsty epidemicthirsty epidemicyou push the blue pill through its foilyou push the blue pill through its foilyou know each new medicine trailsyou know each new medicine trailsour dead behind it like wedding cansour dead behind it like wedding canslistenlistenyou can hear them now can t you?you can hear them now can t you?

I advise rest; the farmhouse we dug you up in has been modernized, and the people who hung you as their ikon against the long passage wall are underground   Incubus   and excellent woman, we inherit the bone acre of your cages and laws. This dull green land suckled at your blood s frigor Anglicanus,frigor Anglicanus, crowning with a housewife s tally   the void of Empire, does not remember you   and certain bloody bandaged ghosts rising from holes of Armageddon at Gallipoli or Sling Camp, would like to fire a shot   through the gilt frame. I advise rest, Madam; and yet the tomb holds much that we must travel barely without. Your print    from an original pencil drawing by the Marchioness    of Granby, March, eighteen nine- ty seven   Little mouth, strong nose and hooded eye   they speak of half-truths my type have slung out of the window, and lack and feel the lack too late. Queen,   you stand most for the time of early light, clay roads, great trees unfelled, and the smoke from huts where girls in sack dresses stole butter . . . The small rain spits today. You smile in your grave.

If in his image made am I, then make me a miracle. Make my shrine a copper faucet leaking everlasting Evian to the masses. Make this empty water glass a goblet of long-legged French wine. Make mine a Prince-purple body bag designed by Crown Royal for tax collectors to spill over & tithe into just before I rise. If in his image made am I, then make my vessel a pearl Coupe de Ville. Make mine the body of a 28-year-old black woman in a blue patterned maxi dress cruising through Hell on Earth, TX again alive. If in his image made are we, then why the endless string of effigies? Why so many mortal blasphemes? Why crucify me in HD across a scrolling news ticker, tied to a clothesline of broken necks long as Time? Is this thing on? Jesus on the ground. Jesus in the margins. Of hurricane & sea. Jesus of busted levees in chocolate cities. Jesus of the Middle East (Africa) & crows flying backwards. Of blood, on the leaves, inside diamond mines, in under- developed mineral-rich countries. If in your image made are we, the proliferation of your tie-dyed hippie doppelg nger makes you easier to daily see. & in this image didn t we make the godhead, slightly stony, high enough to surf a cloud? & didn t we leave you there, where, surely, paradise or justice must be meted out? Couldn t we see where water takes the form of whatever most holds it upright? If then this is what it s come down to. My faith, in rifle shells. In Glock 22 magazine sleeves. Isn t it also then how, why, in a bucket shot full of holes, I ve been made to believe?

There s wondering, idle thoughts, thinking over what was last said, some poetry in my head like traffic outside the window. In my forgetful marrow, I consider often lying words, like everything and all.everythingallNothing is another matter.Nothing Nothing comes of everything and all. Something comes of nothing. I know the word no means no,noyes, yes, except when they mean each other.yes There s water, which means water,waterdishwater, that may mean worthless.dishwater It s often better to say worthless when you mean it.worthless I ve come to meaning, that can meanmeaningreason for or reason to live,reason forreason to live words I might say outright without first saying meaning.meaning Then there is a mean man. How did mean come to have two meanings?mean Take a dictionary of homonyms and tell me how words got to sound alike with different meanings and spellings, a Sea of  Words which is a Chinese dictionary. Language has its ways, its altitude and latitude ...     Stanley, baby, quit jerking on and off. I m simply talking to myself. I am more familiar with the dark night and bright day of the body than the dark night of the soul. Light has an exaggerated reputation. Goethe s last words were,  Mehr Licht! Mehr Licht! Faust was dragged off to hell when he was content. Goethe preferred discontent, which needed light. The seed is contained discontent.

The old cupola glinted above the clouds, shone among fir trees, but it took him an hour for the half mile all the way up the hill. As he trailed, the village passed him by, greeted him, asked about his health, but everybody hurried to catch the mass, left him leaning against fences, measuring the road with the walking stick he sculpted. He yearned for the day when the new church would be built right across the road. Now it rises above the moon: saints in frescoes meet the eye, and only the rain has started to cut through the shingles on the roof of his empty house. The apple trees have taken over the sky, sequestered the gate, sidled over the porch.

  

So now I have confessed that he is thine, And I my self am mortgaged to thy will, Myself I ll forfeit, so that other mine Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still: But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free, For thou art covetous, and he is kind; He learned but surety-like to write for me, Under that bond that him as fast doth bind. The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take, Thou usurer, that put st forth all to use, And sue a friend came debtor for my sake; So him I lose through my unkind abuse.     Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:     He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.

They are dying out and I want to reach them before they are gone Not that I know what I would say to them when I get there Their songs rippling beneath temporary sky As I approach, as I am doing now Even though I am nowhere near wherever they are Swirling in blossoming dust and dreaming they are not   They are dying out and I want to reach them before they are gone Just as I want to reach myself before I too am gone Another blossom sliding into slime What notes do I hear drenched in fiery sky Are these ghosts rising up before me Or gasps of dust near a lake covered by algae   They are dying out and I want to reach them before their names vanish Before they become ghosts dying in pink algae and ruined vowels Not that I know what their songs say Telling sting of monstrous human torrent Wheeling above burning story of lost lives Tapering branches of smoke, red and yellow leaves falling   They are dying out and I want to reach them Before my name joins theirs in plastic matrimony Before a blue-eyed undertaker powders my nose Or I turn to powder in squirt gun of unprofitable insects Secrets folded away never rinsed in scum corner History erasing traces of its nothing new

That kind of summer's day when music comes down from the hills and sings in small back-rooms and half-sets from a century before batter their complex hobnails on the floor and long laments in overcoats and caps draw tears, reluctant from the porter-taps   that was the kind of day it was, that day when I forsook the world of earn and pay. There, on the cobbles of the market square, where toothless penny ballads rasped the air, there among spanners, scollops, hones, and pikes, limp Greyhound cabbage, mending-kits for bikes, velvet calves in creels, women's overalls, she shook my hand beside the market stalls. And there before the coulter of a plough, aware of all the gifts she could endow, aware, as women are, of all her powers, as startling as a bunch of winter flowers, she tricked from me my childish, sacred vow. I got to know her lovers one by one: some saw her in an eclipse of the sun, some saw her practise magic with strange herbs and made her opaque alchemies of verbs   some, for her sake, thought blood her favourite wine, and some thought spirits helped them to divine her arcane instincts and, as holy fools, would chant her words not known to any schools. Some thought that secret nurture made her grow and more believed she thrived in public show; some scattered syntax like the blackthorn snow in flashy spangles on the mud below and some, like me, immersed themselves in laws, for what good are the sparks without the straws? But none of these sufficed. All through the land I see the poets in their mad distress   all favoured rivals? No, but victims, yes. A creature driven by a savage gland, she takes, and then dismisses, out of hand, the men and women that she most does bless. She does not rest, she does not detumesce. I leave her by a river on a bed, a silken landscape underneath her head, and spread her in her finest courting gown on a spectacular eiderdown with painted eyes and rings to catch the light by the oblivious water overnight. Only the poets can make her come to life, the stricken catalyst, who call her wife   at dawn I give her bed a gentle shove and amputate the antennae of love and watch the river carry her away into the silence of a senseless bay where light ignores the facets of her rings and where names are not the names of things.  

By way of my mother, the deacon with the slick gray hair and money clip in his pocket can claim a percentage of my body like tithe rights. And on this Sunday, as with every other Sunday, he is a slender ebony panel in the fence of faith, one man in the company of men standing shoulder to shoulder in suits, tapping their toes, clapping their hands, putting muscle to work in the making of praise music. We Baptists call this devotion, my working definition of whichdevotion is faithfulness to the light. To the extent that God is as whitefaithfulness to the light as the clouds of heaven, this theory holds. To the extent these particular men are dark, I must consider other possibilities: that God remade himself in my image so that we could be closer or that devotion means the commitment of black men to standthe commitment of black men to stand with one another, form a barricade of soldiers against anything as necessary, the Lord being the force holding them fast in line. It isn t always easy for me to see these explanations as separate: any film, any photograph of Martin Luther King Jr. leading a march, with his position centered in a line of bodies covering the entire width of the frame   if I take a wide view of that scene, I see the Lord at work. If  I zoom in, on a single person or the breach between two, I see no trace of the Lord at all, a hint that He can t exist in small spaces.                                                                   And what s more, consider this: say Chicago PD pulls a long line of youths into the precinct for photographs   all of them dark, all of them wearing the same colors    and stands them shoulder to shoulder. Zoom in: nothing. Zoom out: the Lord? Why not? There s clearly commitment there, devotion. They re all definitely soldiers, on the battlefield for something: maybe it s white, maybe it s green, maybe it s a colorless feeling. I ve got no good answers, only darkness. I m still trying to decipher if it means anything that Dr. King lived in Vice Lords territory when he spent  66 in Chicago, that the words  vice  and  Lord  are affiliates, homeboys, next-door neighbors. I think about their coming up together in the mind of a boy living on that side of town, a percentage of his body, perhaps, claimed as a tax; I can t shake this feeling that when he throws his muscles into praise music, when sound leaves his precious mouth, people scatter. I can t help but believe our songs, to one another, would be familiar, church family:                                                      I am on the battlefield for my Lord                                                      I am on the battlefield for my Lord                                          I m on the battlefield for my Lord                            and I promised Him that I                                           would serve Him till I die                                                       till I die, till I die, till I die

The baboon is eating strawberries expired on the shelf of the Ft. Bragg Safeway. A coastal landscape with waves like inexpertly torn tinfoil hangs above his left shoulder at the check-in desk of an abandoned motel. The ocean itself is only a sound through a torn window screen where some hardscrabble bush about to flower is just a smell. Will something appropriately random please happen to convince me reality is still playing with a full deck?  

When i blow open green bottles straight across hump of a frozen tongue when i shove brown glass through skull of a possum and pass from my ears a baptism of red piss when i cry from my butt like a jackal and throw limbs of a dying mule into the river when i spit venom from the head burn codeine into a cosmetic paste and grieve into a wax of dried bulls when my mystical bunions jam eyes into searching spit of a starving wolf into cosmic lips like monkey genitals And i receive my pickled turned skeleton of rusty chains in the bodega i receive a symbolic heart made of five middle fingers in the bodega i receive a teeth parade of yellow roses to leave the bodega and cross the rio grande onto the flatbead bones of a musty nighttrain I say to see me loosen jaws like a snake to see me exhausted after a few strikes to see me pay dirt to the ice hog in my masai-pachuca-doo squatting on a pillow of old zoot suits squatting among the names and breeds breaking down cheeks dotted on this night train and i say i dream of the 1943 riots I say i dream in a hailstorm of riots And i say riots dream into a mass of skins stooping on flatbed bones of a funky nighttrain And when i siphon sweat for fuel from this patron saint of chronic diarrhea When i turn this rubber face into a spotted puma and take on the forceful winds of the prune pickers When my laughter dominates the last seat And i burn labor contracts into brown port caca Then I approach in mother of pearl and human blood in father of smoking and coughing throats and in my jelly of coyote strings who is to say what when i approach I mean somewhere along the road in this cold cold chicken shit somewhere along the road in this wasted body somewhere along the road eat stocks, bonds feathers somewhere along the road eat stocks, bonds feathers  somewhere along the road confiscate borders from wild dogs  somewhere along the road shove them into the imperial valley  somewhere along the road cry hard and let this night train sink its rundown rectum of electric chairs into heaven and say fuck it I see a way through the maroon glass of this milky way I say i see a way through for the cradle of hulls sticking through these indigo ankles I see a way through for these torn shoes stinking like dead cats I see a way through for these blood-streaked legs I say i see a way through for these pus-riddled holes in their suction-cup lips and when i pass through toothless combs coming from armpits of the bodega when i pass through bats on corkscrews coming from the bodega when i push my mortified flesh from this bodega and walk with the mildew of an old zoot suit walk tall in my mud-packed-masai-pachuca-doo walk among the survivors from the musty nighttrains fuck it I say dreams are like riots i say we dream in a hailstorm of riots and I say riots dream into a mass of skins coming from flatbed bones of the funky funky nighttrains

sleeps into heaven with his lamps on, finishing explan- atory negotiations for a while. Desert the enemy. StarDesert the enemy.  formations, sandstone understanding, rock time in gen- eral, whatever. Latching onto ecstasy, words that change on waking, clover as a syrup of spring mind. Working off a deficit of sleep or cash, you know who your friends are. Singled out in traffic, lurching into light, having lunch. You re a little one with sand in your eyes, with green on your horn, with milk on your chin. With flow- ering ears and hearsay.  

is a meadow after a snowfall that a poem hopes to cross

The bright drop quivering on a thorn in the rich silence after rain, lute music in the orchard aisles, the paths ablaze with daffodils, intrigue and venery in the air  l ombre des jeunes filles en fleurs,  l ombre des jeunes filles en fleurs, the iron hand and the velvet glove   come live with me and be my love.   A pearl face, numinously bright, shining in silence of the night, a muffled crash of smouldering logs, bad dreams of courtiers and of dogs, the Spanish ships around Kinsale, the screech-owl and the nightingale, the falcon and the turtle dove   come live with me and be my love.  

We walked through some heartache in '62. Gary liked Teresa but Teresa asked Elizabeth to tell Peter that she really wanted to go out with him but Peter had been making out with Jane in the theater, celebrating their one month anniversary, so that was out, and even though Jane broke up with Pete, Peter kept asking Gail to talk with Jane which Gail wouldn't do because she'd told Brenda that she thought that Peter was cute but Brenda wasn't listening to a word, wrapped up in lonely teardrops shed for Greg. The waters of 8th grade were never still.

my shoes rest all night under my bed tired they stretch and loosen their laces wide open they fall asleep and dream of walking they revisit the places they went to during the day and wake up cheerful relaxed so soft

If anybody made a movie out of my life I wouldn't like it, but I'd watch it twice If they halfway tried to do it right There'd be forty screen writers workin' day and nite.   They'd need a research team from Uncle Sam And go from David Allen Coe to Billy Graham It would run ten days in the final cut And that would mean leaving out the gossip smut.   And I do request for my children's sake Don't ever let 'em do a new re-make The thing I'm sayin' is, don't you see, Don't make a movie 'bout me Even for T.V. Don't make a movie 'bout me.   Don't let 'em drag old Hickory Lake For my telephones and bottles and roller skates Down forty feet in the Cumberland mud There's a rusty old gun that once shed blood Out a hundred yards from my lakeside house Weighted down with a rock is a skirt and blouse A dozen pair of boots that made a dozen corns Trombones, trumpets, harmonicas and horns And the tapes that I threw from the lakeside door Silverstein, and Kristofferson from years before Everything has a story that should be let be So don t make a movie  bout me.   If they're hot on a book called Man in Black Tell 'em I've got the rights and won't give back If you don't know my tune you can't get it right I don't talk about me in . . . Man in White.   Truth, said the Master, cannot be hid But he didn't say slap it in the face of my kids. A stone is a stone and forever a stone But I'm part good and bad and then I'm gone.   There is no sin cleaner than the dirtiest So there's a lot about me that I don't want missed If it's days or years or whatever will be Don't make a movie 'bout me.   Aw, I might as well face it cause they will some day So while I can I've got a thing to say I don't know anybody that I said I don't know And there ain't anybody anywhere I owe   The I.R.S. gets the lion's share And what is left goes to my own named heirs. Don't let 'em make it in Hollywood If they must, tell 'em Arkansas is where they should.   Here s a hex on whoever makes it be, So don t make a movie 'bout me. For Love or Monee Don't make a movie 'bout me.

Come in, come in. The water s fine! You can t get lost here. Even if you want to hide behind a clutch            of spiny oysters   I ll find you. If you ever leave me            at night, by boat, you ll see the arrangement of red-gold sun stars in a sea of milk. And though it s tempting to visit them   stay. I ve been trained           to gaze up all my life, no matter the rumble           on earth, but I learned it s okay to glance down into the sea. So many lessons bubble up if you know where to look. Clouds of plankton churning            in open whale mouths might send you east            and chewy urchins will slide you west. Squid know how to be rich when you have ten empty arms. Can you believe there are humans who don t value           the feel of a good bite and embrace at least once a day?           Underneath you, narwhals spin upside down while their singular tooth needles you like a compass pointed towards home. If you dive             deep enough where imperial volutes and hatchetfish             swim, you will find all the colors humans have not yet named, and wide caves of black coral and clamshell. A giant squid finally let itself be captured            in a photograph, and the paper nautilus ripple-flashes            scarlet and two kinds of violet when it silvers you near. Who knows what will happen next? And if you still want to look up, I hope you see the dark sky as oceanic              boundless, limitless   like all the shades of blue in a glacier.           Listen how this planet spins with so much fin, wing, and fur.

Adriaen het Kint, dead prisoner, passes back through the eye of the needle into the wombed-shaped anatomy theater in a caul of umbra mortis, lo.umbra mortis,  Tho I pass through the valley of the shadow of death, I wear a caul stitched by the needle through which a camel passed, like the condom passed through the drug mule, sperm through the pierced condom, a camera through a heart.  Just as the face of every Dutchman is lit by a flashbulb conceived two hundred years in the future, Adriaen het Kint now lifts a flayed hand to demonstrate how to put the god back together once he s been dismembered and scattered among the reeds. Adriaen het Kint, shall we gather at the river to scoop up the disjecta membra? How,disjecta membra?  with flayed hand, shall we pluck the white lyre that rides the black thorax of the zika mosquito, resplendent in her viral robes? She is a messenger to all nations as she lowers her improbable proboscis into the human layer and vomits an inky toxin from the Greek for arrow inkarrow  for arrow, an arrow thatarrowarrow sinks its bleat into the alien chordatachordata so that the future contracts into itself, slinks off, slips further down the drain, sinks further down the wall outside the clinic, the infected needle blocking the stoma of the future with a crusty pus. The sleeper juts a canine up through the gum without meaning to, and an answering moon orbiting Jupiter winks back a salt signature, betrays a vein of water asleep beneath the frozen strata whereunto a white-clad nurse or rover soon will sink  a toothed cannula to draw it off How complete ly she circumvents the eye of the needle how completely she bypasses that camel-route to Heaven as she drains away for human use the plasma and the data  

I mean this thing   I want to write and no other   You will not be so clever   as to resurrect the feathered   the tatty wings of a costumed   angel in my dining room   tatty spatial realm   room where I exist and look at things and eat them   and float nine inches above the floor   and no one else need know   and no other poet   will do       The poet will do   what the poet will do and mime   or maim the poet   meme in fancy   venue or classroom or focus   group the wings of the poet   relax and warm and shed and oracular   shit out the window in a pile by the side of the road   and the commitment of the poet   to engage, subvert, refract, or remand   is safe in my vagina at last where it belongs.  

I like how the mallard ducklings goofy and weak waddle up the cement incline then slide into this runoff of lawn sprinklers and car washes and how the great blue heron seems to be teleported here from the Jurassic to look for extinct species of fish but mostly I like the way the little birds fly in and out of the barbed wire with only a smear of water to keep them singing.

   rilke s separation   rilke s separation the unusual rilke and the usual rilke are stuck in their sameness the unusual rilke and the usual rilke would have stayed together the unusual rilke and the usual rilke would have to separate the unusual rilke and the usual rilke both knew it   rilke s breath   rilke s breath       1 rilke breathed the air the good air       2 rilke breathed without pause   rilke s nose   rilke s nose entrance and exit of the air it knew stench scent aroma handkerchief sniffles   rilke s name   rilke s name rilke said he when asked for his name rilke one said when asked for his name or never heard of him   rilke, unrhymed   rilke, unrhymed rilke said he then he said cuke then quietly cloud   rilke s boat   rilke s boat taking a stroke sitting there sitting there taking a stroke  rilke s drawer  rilke s drawer       1 he pulled out the drawer he put something in something was in there he pushed in the drawer       2 he pulled out the drawer something was in there he took something out he pushed in the drawer       3 he pulled out the drawer nothing was in there he put nothing in he left the drawer open   rilke s chest   rilke s chest       1 he lifted up the lid he put something in something was in there he shut the lid       2 he lifted up the lid something was in there he took something out he shut the lid       3 he lifted up the lid nothing was in there he put nothing in he left the chest open   rilke s shoe   rilke s shoe rilke s shoe was one of two each shoe of rilke s was one of two rilke in shoes always wore two calf to calf stood rilke jutting up from his shoes   rilke s window   rilke s window he opened the window stuck his head out pulled his head in closed it he opened the window morning air rushed in evening air night air he closed the window   rilke s glass   rilke s glass rilke took a glass filled it with water lifted it to his mouth drank   rilke s hand   rilke s hand rilke s hand and rilke s hand hanging by his side rilke s hand in rilke s hand the one in the other rilke s hand in the hand of another greeting him rilke s hand at rilke s mouth sensing it there   rilke in conversation   rilke in conversation someone asks rilke answers rilke asks someone answers neither is very happy about it neither is very sad   rilke s reward   rilke s reward this now was his reward nobody was certain what he meant rilke wept   rilke s contradiction   rilke s contradiction and yet small and white and yet big and black and yet small and black and yet big and white and yet small and big and yet white and black and yet small and black and yet big and small and black   rilke s eyes   rilke s eyes rilke opened his eyes everything was visible nothing was invisible rilke shut his eyes nothing was visible everything was invisible rilke opened his eyes nothing was invisible everything was visible rilke shut his eyes nothing was visible nothing was invisible   rilke s weight   rilke s weight rilke is being relieved of his weight so roughly does the earth raise her son   Translated from the German Translated from the German Translated from the German 

All zodiac all  radar your voice I carried it across the Atlantic to Barcelona I photographed cathedrals cacti mosaic salamanders I even photo- graphed my lust always your voice skimming a woman s skin mattress springs so noisy so birdlike you filled her room with cages camera bright in my pocket map unfolding in my mind I explored a park leaves notched & enormous graffitied boulders then three men    tall & clean closed in they broke open my body with their fists insufferable your red wool cap insufferable the way you walked away from me come back please the buttons on your jacket are finches I wanted to yell as you vanished into a hotel to drink with your friends there was nothing more you could do after my attackers left before I got up I touched my face almost tenderlyradar your voiceI carried itacross the Atlanticto BarcelonaI photographedcathedralscacti mosaicsalamandersI even photo-graphed my lustalwaysyour voice skimminga woman s skinmattress springsso noisy so birdlikeyou filled her roomwith cagescamera brightin my pocket mapunfoldingin my mindI explored a parkleaves notched& enormousgraffitied bouldersthenthree mentall & cleanclosed inthey broke openmy bodywith their fistsinsufferableyour red wool capinsufferable the wayyou walkedaway from mecome back pleasethe buttonson your jacketare finchesI wanted to yellas you vanishedinto a hotelto drink withyour friendsthere was nothingmoreyou could doafter my attackers leftbefore I got upI touched my facealmost tenderly

A question posed to Flannery O'Connor, as to whether writing programs stifled writers, drew the famous, tart rejoinder that in her opinion they didn't stifle nearly enough.
Even if, as it is often said, there are too many of us poets, that is that the field is too crowded (as opposed to too many hedge-fund managers or too many pharmaceutical lobbyists or too many fundamentalists), time, rejection, discouragement, and the inevitable practicalities and detours (some of them fortuitous), as well as wasted energy, the slow seepage or sudden shift of interest, premature death, burdensome debt or better offers, usually cure the problem of overpopulation. In other words, there are plenty of natural predators

Five daughters, in the slant light on the porch, are bickering. The eldest has come home with new truths she can hardly wait to teach. She lectures them: the younger daughters search the sky, elbow each other's ribs, and groan. Five daughters, in the slant light on the porch and blue-sprigged dresses, like a stand of birch saplings whose leaves are going yellow-brown with new truths. They can hardly wait to teach, themselves, to be called "Ma'am," to march high-heeled across the hanging bridge to town. Five daughters. In the slant light on the porch Pomp lowers his paper for a while, to watch the beauties he's begotten with his Ann: these new truths they can hardly wait to teach. The eldest sniffs, "A lady doesn't scratch." The third snorts back, "Knock, knock: nobody home." The fourth concedes, "Well, maybe not in church . . . " Five daughters in the slant light on the porch.

A child climbs into a cardboard house, shuts its doors and windows to hold in the dark, and lies on her back inside, looking up through its cut-out moon and stars. She knows she is not looking at the sky. But she calls out, still,It's nighttime! I'm looking at the sky!It's nighttime! I'm looking at the sky

To lie on a beach after looking at old poems: how slow untroubled by any grouch of mine or yours, Father Ocean tumbles in the bay alike with solitary   divers, cripples, yelling girls and pipestem kids. He does what suits us all; and somewhere   there, out there, where the high tight sails are going   he wears a white death flag of foam for us, far   out, for when we want it. So on Gea s breast, the broad nurse who bears with me, I think of adolescence: that sad boy I was, thoughts crusted with ice on the treadmill of self-love,   Narcissus damned, who yet brought like a coal in a hallow stalk, the seed of fire that runs through my veins now. I praise that sad boy now, who having no hope, did not blow out his brains.  

My words were sent underground to where the toggle switch detonates. That was the glare our voices were avoiding. There was something also   broken about the obedience of this retainer. The arcades weren t semaphores just because the arrows leading there facilitated those   of us in line as though reliant on east or west quadrants. The ticket master was prone to elide requests from the travelers, the sliding doors   sounded a fanfare for the common man, get faster as thought, or mind the gaps. What I infer can never altogether establish a space adequate   to the body count. The platform motivates two guardians who were instructed in safekeeping to usher me from harm s way but my stand   point so recedes from this tableaux as to acknowledge a footprint perspective. Translucent envelope inside remaindered by the riptide   or such tunnel vision as to warrant arrest. Why I was sent to the nether world inflicted with no wound. Someone lets fall a pair of zip locks   containing the pixie sticks of this conspiracy; what I had to say was sent, I mentioned this I think already, underground switch and toggle   intended to ignite what I could never bring myself to mean. Where the voices were avoiding me hands outstretched at quarter day to hold   back the beam was there something broken? I weather compliant. I rally.

We need a preacher who ll say up in here instead of herein.up in hereherein Our vows should reference calla lilies and the snowy pistils they jab ardently at our faces. Let s place their linty, foul-mouthed kiss at the center of satin table cloths white as bee boxes and us buzzing like the ichthyic insects we ll invent:  coddle- fish  finning the air, murmuring for words beyond civil andcivilceremony, beyond moderation, all our senses under assault.ceremony

Demain! Not much of a glass. So-called legerdemain padded by you know who in the direction of Argentina: a #3 pencil implacable as a first aid kit. War or pine trees. Thus nothing is spotted with Futurism and hillsides, the idiom we skulk in in honor of which differential diagnoses take a nap in November worrisomeness. Reliquary dreams. Frangipani! If you leave without controlled faddishness, shoulder to shoulder like butter, the truculence is on the stargazer side. What godsend fiddles with sadness. Careful about cheekbones, songs including the Atlantic.

Unable to pour boiling water over an edge from kettle to pot water boils from kettle to neti pot still boils from kettle to cup running over boil pool steam pool leak pool little cooling pot over the boiled edge of boil pooled salt vapors sulfurous stank boil heal dangled over the boiled edge of burnt earth cooling salt pool nettle stung black clotted blood at the bottom of the sink

this morning I felt my life if you were dead the expansiveness of the bed the birds still singing the remnants of the smell of coffee in the morning the emptiness of thought the deafening silence of my heart

The great pulsation passed. Glass lay around me Resurrected from the end. I walked Along streets of slate-jabbering houses, Against an acrid cloud of dust, I saw The houses kneel, revealed each in its abject Prayer, my prayer as well: 'Oh God, Spare me the lot that is my neighbour's.' Then, in the upper sky, indifferent to our Sulphurous nether hell, I saw The dead of the bombed graveyard, a calm tide Under the foam of stars above the town. And on the roof-tops there stood London prophets Saints of Covent Garden, Parliament Hill Fields, Hampstead, Hyde Park Corner, Saint John's Wood, Crying aloud in cockney fanatic voices: 'In the midst of Life is Death!' They kneeled And prayed against the misery manufactured In mines and ships and mills, against The greed of merchants, vanity of priests. They sang: 'We souls from the abyss To whom the stars are fields of flowers, Tell you: Rejoice in the abyss! For hollow is the skull, the vacuum In the gold ball, St Paul's gold cross. Unless you will accept the emptiness Within the bells of foxgloves and cathedrals, Each life must feed upon the deaths of others, The shamelessly entreating prayer Of every house will be that it is spared Calamity that strikes its neighbour.'  

A lavender fog breeds with our children. Our girls are dying on the roadsides, their wombs pried open by the scramble that grows inside. Save us from the lavender fog    it s the ghosts of your dead people, who have never bothered our village before. Their shapes convulse in our water sources. When we get close enough to hear their ghostly voices, they say yum-yum pleadinglyyum-yum and shout out better better as in I ll get better.better betterI ll get better Some of our children have taken these as lyrics. Your ghosts are corrupting the youth. Stop using us as musical instruments, this is a great taboo you have violated! Go back to making tubes of wood vibrate and scraping your goat gut.

Standing at a desk of cranberries     a small triumph of jumps     I wait longer than the rescue of rains     I send prayers to the terror walking north

I do a pantomime on the edge of the cliff     overreacting to the sea and the creatures in back of the house     if  you had just looked out I would have said this is my little resonance
The guile of parrots     a carnival     a killing     a crusade    the final  pursuit either a panorama or a demon
The fan click refuses to stop or to cancel its insistence     stubborn in the face of carnage     the once famous once child fortunes     the fifty days of posters     all the field deaths     all the cries of Jimmy! Caddie! Victor! Are you coming?
Today not to beard but to wear black     today not to trace the creases on my face     today caught in parts     today to bicep toward justice but not to beard     as if that were even a possibility     even with lasers and goats     an ocean of black dogs and boats     searching for better swells     a more favorable forecast     a mast out of water     I want what the pelican sees
An answer comes in the smell of woodsmoke as he passes     by a personal note at the slope of his neck    trials of bridges and the moon alongside Pont Marie     I follow that smell with the O of sails and sorted shoes     with brushes and the corners of candles     a firm clap then the rubber stickiness of stones     I follow the tremble with the white noise of busses and a can of coins     surrounded by Joyce and daughter     blind on a broken chair     hearing cobbles
I m just like you     some dying     some grief     some scotch     my final please unhooked from fire and earrings     knees in the grass     sinking into the sorted dirt     my beach a tree pleading with the summer surf    walking or chased    a finned orange fish that sucks at my sleep    a morning trail in lavender musk     preacher mounds    a human fever    a corner room settled in blue plaid    a pot of red bowls     a curtain of frames     a pitted eye    a hill    a chimney     a pear
Where would these words be without a subject?    little carvings of mosquitoes landing on my hands     headaches digging an elision of craters     a great empty blow of air that follows my feet    the big lumber of my dog s no longer here     his hair an excursion still fluttering on the tile     slush and whispered breath     where the naked man on the street washes his back with purple flowers
You keep saying boy like it s the belt that was used to tie you to the bed     you keep saying bull like you were forced to fight     you keep saying dragon as if courage had no sound     you keep saying hair and crib like babies come out of shells
From button to button     what spunky rope    what cold claustrophobe    what caravan of pack dogs    what kink and rocky tunnels do I have to sliver through     every exhausted moon    batteries dwindling toward unnameable and permanent night     my knees pray the floor will open to a new city
A door to my back     the molding cheesy and rectal     I run with the horses across the field     the town wiped off the track and left behind    you curl up at the back of my neck and we go bucking over the whole knot of trails     the whole veiny landthis is my little resonanceboybulldragonhaircrib

It's just me throwing myself at you, romance as usual, us times us, not lust but moxibustion, a substance burning close to the body as possible withut risk of immolation. Nearness without contact causes numbness. Analgesia. Pins and needles. As the snugness of the surgeon's glove causes hand fatigue. At least this procedure requires no swag or goody bags, stuff bestowed upon the stars at their luxe functions. There's no dress code, though leg irons are always appropriate. And if anyone says what the hell are you wearing in Esperanto  Kion diable vi portas? Kion diable vi portas  tell them anguish is the universal language. Stars turn to trainwrecks and my heart goes out admirers gush. Ground to a velvet! But never mind the downside, mon semblable, mon crush. Love is just the retaliation of light. It is so profligate, you know, so rich with rush.

If my fingers could twang the guitar as before they would not be what they are and neither would I. I would be back in young-time. Incline towards me, Gwendolyn, this Monday, and lend me your ear while I loll on my pillows to turn your songs from strings into tin.  

The faded remains of ancient advertising    captives on parade in native costume. Now the whangam, that imaginary animal led by Wharfinger, keeper of the wharf. And you, my puce, sitting between the paws of the mechanical lion, his brittle heart of glass. The regiments of holiday shoppers, in formations two-by-two, are borne along the sliding pavements between displays into the Pavilion of the Encrusted Compass. O hub of panopticon, each moment on display, from the central monitor there is no escape. This is all accomplished, even the symphonic wrecking of the antique locomotive, in silence. I have misplaced my whipcat and whinstone. I try to recall something that I know. A westing is a space of distance westward. Wheep: the sound of steel drawn from a sheath. What was the name of the Babylonian sidekick of Sir Thomas More s lead warren? Time for the steam-driven, slow reckoning, for the chains and block and tackle dangling from the eternally unfinished dome, the chrome- plated waterfall and the ascension into the arcades, the arcades and their broken promises.

Bear in mind, my little man: Never let your verses scan. And acceptance will be sparse If, by any chance, they parse. But whatever else you do, Let it not be said of you That your poetry makes sense!. . . .That s a criminal offense!That s   

To be a disco ball dangling in a storefront window, in the sun, with a cage on  it. To be two and three disco balls, downtown McAllen, spangles of sun and  water that grew tangerine skins late February, pink bottlebrush nostrils, buff-bellied hummingbirds. To be mirrors and hexagonal combs, mexican honey  wasps, larvae, paper, wax. To make geometry without vocabulary, to be live  music take off your jacket, girl, wear your tank top . . . it's ninety degrees! To be a green light go, downtown Corpus, after cars and trucks zooming on beach  sand, before hot tubs. To be an orange sun driving from Anzald a's grave, to  be a cactus bloom fuchsia, opuntia, Laguna Atascosa, Laguna Madre, to be a  watering hole, a mud chimney air vent for crawdad water tunnels. To be a silver lizard run over by tires, a swatch of river on asphalt, to be a bolt loosened from  the border wall, to be a peso falling out of the border crossing's revolving slot,  to be a coke-bottle dove, a mexican coca-cola, a cooing quorum of loter a cards  signing a resolution. To be a goose perched on top of an abandoned sink in a yard, in a town that fords the river, to be the woman stretched on her beloved's grave, returned after decades. To be a kid in juvie, to be her guardian, the judge,  the p.o., to be the letters she writes, the words that matter more than food, almost as much as music and more than makeup, nearly suns seen through the mandatory skylight, imagined by the control room monitor. To be el chal n, the last hand-drawn ferry on the river, its ropes pulled by pilots, to be a passenger  almost on the other side.

Richer than mother's milk is half-and-half. Friends of two minds, redouble your craft. Our shelves our hives, our selves a royal jelly, may we at Benares and Boston, Philly and Delhi collect our birthright nectar. No swarm our own, we must be industrious, both queen and drone. Being two beings requires a rage for rigor, rewritable memory, hybrid vigor. English herself is a crossbred mother mutt, primly promiscuous and hot to rut. Oneness? Pure chimera. Splendor is spliced. Make your halves into something twice your size, your tongue a hyphen joining nation to nation. Recombine, become a thing of your own creation, a many-minded mongrel, the line's renewal, self-made and twofold, soul and dual.  

This is an old apartment and therefore the mirrors are huge and ornate. They go with the high ornate ceilings. There s one such mirror in the living room and another in the bedroom. Both have intricately carved borders and a leafy crest on top. In the living room these have been painted over in white, but in the bedroom it s still the original gilt rococo. Both mirrors sit on top of fireplaces and are as big as tombs. I think the descriptive term for them is French Regency Baroque.The mirror in the bathroom is pretty big too, and again somewhat ornate. And there are two other mirrors here as well. Not bad for a small, one-bedroom flat.The problem is I ve never been too fond of mirrors. I rarely look into them, and only then to make sure my hair isn t sticking up, or there s no toothpaste showing, or when I m fine-trimming the beard, to make sure I ve missed no section. Oh, there are exceptional other occasions. Once when I got a red eye on a transatlantic flight, for example, I kept checking on the progress of the red s disappearance. Or when I fell on gravel and got an ugly friction wound on my forehead, I had to first deal with applying the dressing, then keep an eye on how that healing was coming along. Very slowly, as it happened.As for gazing into the mirror to see if  I look OK enough to go out into the world, or   perish the thought   if I look attractive today, the answer is no way! Que sera, sera, as the song goes.no wayQue sera, seraTiny children love the mirror and it s very pleasant to watch them gazing into it. Dogs don t understand it and bark fiercely at the rival dog that s their reflection. I once gave a woman a full-length mirror as an Xmas present. It wasn t ornate or gilded, and it got smashed soon afterwards, and seven years of bad luck followed.But if   I want to look at myself in the mirror regularly or for lengthy periods there s plenty opportunity for it in this apartment. I could even stand naked and see everything. And as Monsieur Baudelaire reminds us, according to the immortal principles of 1789, everyone has equal rights; therefore I have the right to behold myself with pleasure or distaste. It is between me and my conscience.

This is not a waiting room for souls. It is modern, totally unwindowed.   The sun threw a ray away,                lost two rays it s raining here in the room.   On the beach it looks very evening already, money removed from the world:   if one travels somewhere and back again, one is always different we are not   separated on the journey. My mouth keeps spr-       inging open.   Everything does not have to have a limit   : varnish out, dooryear winter ice is caught in winter,   I plunged myself but not under. (I can t pull it out of my head,         can I.) Godthrough: a word with a star tied around       it, it   has to hit someone. Was such a storm the trees fell over,   there was a storm against. I have got a lot more songs in my mouth:   Shudderhorror.       Souldoll.             Shiverbeard,               is there much enough snow?             is that supposed to be lakes for the chessmen have   reached the bank? Mother shakes the little tree. Otherwise the darkness   will read it and will remain dark forever. A dream falls off,   a little shirt  the sky is red. And blue. How do the bones   get into my foot? Ung-Ung-train,                            Puff-Puff train   afraided me away. No everything does not have a limit: I saw that I lived   here. That there is a spider       in the window here.       That there is a mirror   here. Twinslight, the       tongue, the garden flowers painted        almostyou: to   walk where it is very dark and the small bell is already hanging   in the air   

We saw a lot more of them dead than alive the living diffident by the side of the road as the far-off mountains flanked and intoxicated the speedometer into saunter   The dead were interspersed on the asphalt their poor vision uncorrected by their auditory keenness like a blind spot in a poet   and their fender-mangled corpses were occasionally ripped in two before vultures reached them   In our rental van we left no mother bereft and orphaned no piglets   Turkey buzzards and American vultures were the javelinas  gift to us   red and black scavengers that perched on ranchland fences the full span of highway they d circle above in diminishing downward spirals   or flinch at each other s puffs and swells or away from incoming vehicles   Still they shared the dead among them as we sometimes share our dead when we love our dead   Javelina the Arabic word for mountain in its root and then the mountain coming closer to an ear became a spear

                            look like birds. Scrawny winter   birds   balanced by   two   sarong                                                       tail   feathers.   Some   look west,                                         others north- east   toward   the                                             mountain.   Stiff in the   cold && remote.   They  haven t  been   loved                                                         enough.   They grow                                            thinner   and thinner   in their   woody streaked   feathers,   held together  only   by the exposed   spiral   of   internal                                         organs.   After  a  while ,   the sun comes out and   all o f   the birds,   clutching   wire,   turn                           an     electric            silver. This is     hopeful,,    but doesn t   last.         Clouds   take a  break   from   one   another , ,                           re-                           convene.   A half-inch of snow is rolled out   with   perfect    evenness               across               the picnic   table,   as though                                                         someone made a blank                                                      for what was                 coming.    The nice thing about   clothespin    birds   is             they   don t  excrete.                             Jays   &   grosbeaks   &   finches &      mourning    doves    + ravens   leave                 their   paintings                 everywhere , on   benches & limbs ,, , on fallen pine needle fascicles \|/                    feldspar & quartz _ __\|/ though   all  has  now   become gesso    beneath    snow.   After   a  certain amount   of                            feeling                 hopelessly under-                          accomplished,   you look at   your   nails and   want   to                          paint them.         Is this how   birds               feel?                 No.         Birds fly and   don t    look                        down.      Or,   they   sit   `     amid branches              and    peck   at the   brittle   waffled   bark                          & tiny    bugs    buried               in   the marrow.  .< sszt sszt sszt .<   You, too,sszt sszt sszt peck.  Familiar letters    on t he   keys have   lost their    definition        and   resemble   finger-                             tip-size   daubs of   bird   paint   on back-                lit platforms.   You   recall the   s   e   &   ms   e      m only   via   entrenched   neural   pathways ,             while   the   l   and   c      continue tolc morph   into tiny   archaic                              symbols.    As though,  the  unconscious is forming      a message.       ( Always    it    has   something                        unearthly     to say. ) Except the unconscious   isis                                         the earth ,    it s   just   we don t  know   how   she               does it.            St. Thomas of Aquinas  got  a delirium                                      hit of   t hat   at the end           and decided  to   marry   it.   Each day your thumbs   grow   paler,   nails   coarser,   evolving              toward   the ptero-                                 dactyl: part  reptile,  part   bird. As  a  child                         pterodactyls   scared you,         which meant             they   had  your             attention.   Refusing to stay                         in   the   lineage,         they became                                       their  own            form.              They had  an  iguana       for     a     father and  a   pelican   for  a    mom, crispy  and  dipped  in  molasses. If you were big enough                                       you could   eat   them                           the  way   some people   eat grass-           hoppers.  Compulsive hole-                          punchers,  if less   manic could be    sculptors,              though it requires d-e-t-a-c-h-m-e-n-td-e-t-a-c-h-m-e-n-t to see  it    that way , , if  you  are                                         a   lilac   leaf   sketching   outside the   library   window.        What are those    books                doing   in there   together ?!                  Nothing ! When a   new    one arrives,   they   fall  in                love,,  one   by one.  Inside  their  covers,                            a   million   leaves, each w/  black   growth.     A pattern of       fungus ,                the  shed  skin  of          snakes  &  dna traces.   Like   bird   poop, but   more orderly     and the message is   see-                                                    through. Don t you              wish    you   could   lift   the   letters                          and   release them       halfway                back   to the  liquid   state ,, ,   before they   got   connected   to the   circuitry?   It might be    kind   of                                       relaxing.  You might be                                                                 as good of a                                                                 painter              as a         cuckoo    bird.    A few nights   ago you  dreamt   you were very     pregnant & in need of    a  place       to give   birth.   Your  boyfriend               had   left         you     and  2    therapists                          let   you    live         w/ them because   you    resembled   their     daughter     though they were     suspicious.   Who    can blame  them?                                                        As for your nails,                                  find  a     mani- curist,   someone  who   knows   what they are             doing.  Druids never  lived   here,             that was    Europe,    but  you and   the   sage- brush              are   distantly   related      via     microbial ancestors;         in spite of    yourself,   you are                                surrounded by   family.   \\|/

The robin makes a laughing sound. It makes me stop and look around to see just what the robin sees  fresh new leaves on twigs of trees, a strong, high branch on which to rest, a safe dry ledge to hold its nest. The robin makes a laughing sound. I stop. I always look around.

I found it in a box I sifted through as I cleaned my office. How clear in mind, the time you drew it nearly thirty years ago. From dawn to dark, a sort of dusk prevailed, the nightbirds up all hours. I've stumbled on signs of ruthless murder in such a day  intinction of snow and blood. I've pictured talons. Not knowing what I felt, still I have sensed, without my witness, intricate change had happened. Snow of course can offer other signs: sweep of a grouse's wing where it flushed and flew, the raptor's errant jabs mere blots to the side, no blatancy of red on the cold white cover. In any case, it was that kind of day when you held the blue-green crayon as gently as a mother might her child, your hand so small I could cry. You frowned, and carefully drew three sides of a square, and then, above, a pair of slanting lines, to roof your house. Then swatches of sky. You glanced sidelong at me: did I approve or not? I knew that this was what you meant to ask. I chuckled. Please forgive me. I stroked your cheek. Look at you now! A mother twice at once, in a home built plumb and true on a leafy street. I consider these parallelograms you drew, each with a cross inside, to form two windows, which, you said, were there for me and you, "For looking down the road." The road was made of lines as well, which not quite parallel  ran right from the doorway off the edge of the page. I clutch you tight in mind as I did so far back down that road, your picture done for then. I pray your babies' dreams and landscapes are as clean and sweet as you seemed to me that day, a perfect figure underneath those Vs  those harmless birds, or bird-abstractions high above the house in their lambent blue-green sky.

Wherever we go, needs feed and I find it harder and harder to believe benevolence is the thing Thousands of Yazidi girls missing and plastic fills the ocean s mouth and the cursive of yr name still occupies the canopy of my throat Fuel, the under- pinning What fires your gd engine Rigor, mortis Cold as unmoving or unmoved The opposite of music Warm in the cold universe Molten, forming A rock becoming magma becoming lava becoming land Land, the trauma of lava Lava the lamp of the ancestors and later a cheeky find in the Junk shop and rising in our living room Livin groom Just bc nothingcares doesn t mean it lacks meaning What s the point ofcaresmeaning curiosity but a train rolling past the spot where the Donner Party feasted n then go on a four hour Wikipedia downward spiral I m the closest thing to a mime parade I whisper, home late tiptoeing down the creaky hallway tryin not to wake my roommates Nice chicken parm, sluts, I say to my fingers at lunch Dissociation is evacuating from the inside I just knowI just know we ll have a good time Junk: a relief map of yr traumas Dipping yr whole arm into the bin of sunflower seeds I m in my Shonda Rhimes Year of Yes n so far it s pretty freak Gave a beej 2 aYear of Yes logger in town for a football game at his hostel (almost wrote hostile) the old-fashioned way, as in I met him at a bar after lingering eye contact No apps Told him I was writing this poem Flush with success after only eating half the cheeseburger for dinner For the first time in my life it wasn t no burger or four burgers Full on Rocky situation He said he was flattered every time his gf s gay friends grabbed his beer can Bacon-wrapped- date-flavored Doritos The artifice of order Predictability, measured time, present wrapping Order, Order, Pockets of Order Or, Durham I dumped a boy from Raleigh today The baton of Junk The dance whirls Whorls War Tortle Cut to mall dressing room thousand outfits montage Ignorance as a tool to revive the feeling of doing something new Junk has to be the poem of our time Pointless accumulation Clinging to a million denials Why do you need an assault rifle? What if radioactiveWhat if radioactive bears Buying in bulk Afraid of forgetting that night in 2007 when Chantal shouted jamiroquai is holding this partyjamiroquai is holding this partytogether!!!! Junk is the garbage ppl keep Didn t they tell youtogether I m a meteorologist but for people What s that called? Psychic? Psychic side chick In maths,  arbitrary  is a thing w/o specific value Quite the Junkery The world, all of its rock formations and space missions and presidents and religious phobias and fashions fossils All of it has always seemed so arbitrary to me, bc to survive this long into an occupation feels sometimes so arbitrary to be And then sometimes so divine Who else could survive but my line It s true, your Junk won t save you from a tsunami, but I m descended from a group whose culture history language gods cosmology calendar stories government gait was capital  O  Obliterated I ll stop writing this when it stops hap- pening So when I  get  anything it s hard to let go Resisting death for generations, I want to make the opposite of death No excuse for a vanilla bean tapioca ball attitude Ever bought a McFlurry n shouted yr dead inside but yew were pointing ayr dead inside finger at yrself and, horrified, yew screamed Ran home but half- way home yew forgot what yew were doing n bought a pair of sneaker boots at DSW or just me? I m building the archive of a life that shouldn t exist Wristband from that gay club in Cartagena where we danced w/ the self-proclaimed Perez Hilton of Colombia Every bar frankly should have tostones smellin up the grill Is a poem abt Junk itself merely an accum- ulation of doomsday and birth certificates If part of Junk is letting go, partly Junk is letting go of you Junk finds a new boo         Control  by Janet Jackson is one of the greatest songs in the nation Warm hearts sparkle in the colonial afternoon Control is a reaction to something smacking that cracks the future w/ no precedent We call this a paradigm shift   say we were totally blindsided Janet wants to take control from her parents From the loss of a first love Control of the narrative Janet wants to Black Cat in boxy military garb Janet wants to show you her midriff and introduce J. Lo to the general public in a few albums Shock is a kind of collision A booming confusion The shudder and the shot are almost indistinguishable Shock has its electric correlate, but is also itself by what surrounds the event: a quiet dinner party vs sweaty racing thoughts And what do you make of it My friend said he found out his crush graduated college in 2014 n hates himself And I m like wait til yr my age thinkin, I totally still look like I m in my 20s ThenI totally still look like I m in my 20s it turns out the dude you were makin out with was born the year Janet, the album, came out What the literal fudge An hourJanet ago you were singing  That s the Way Love Goes  at karaoke In my defense, taller dudes always look older How to negotiate control and the lack of control When yr slap hand gets itchy OK whenever anybody dumps you just think of them as a gif of a white dude wilding out to Wu Tang in a cardigan then suddenly falling into the Grand Canyon   Dating is all the way dumb I don t know what, if any of this, will reach yr peepers but I want to ask you this (and I am guilty of making ppl wade thru some bullshit b4 getting to my point): What do you turn to when breath dashes from yr body like it s on the lamb? Cindy Craw- ford says lighting is everything Take a selfie from the sun- blown window Even supermodels say  lighting  It s comforting! But there s also value in exposing yr engine #BadSelfie Archaic but also so fresh: self-expression Trust is a thing that guides you thru a feed The voice like a handshake I m in front of you There is paper and a trade-off This is ancient, like pixel drift What s under the hood of irritation We call complication a knot A knotted life that doesn t get to be undone Who here has a clear, linear rope? Denial! You have to love yr knots You have to shout them out Curate if need be Janet turns her knots into songs Sonic beauty (tho fuck beauty) Knot is the response A manager is like a politician Not the minutiae but the orchest- ration The dark forest It s hard not to inhale The cave is where to turn when you ve no other recourse This isn t a discussion This isn t a mandate (lol man date) This isn t an answer This is a lineage: Lascaux, Keith Haring, Rihanna How do you draw breath? In and down Heel to crown Janet says I m in control and ends Don t make me lose it As if she knows what s to come. The battle of control is in learning to make, and giving it up

Not to be confused with messenger pigeons, birds sent behind enemy lines in war, but think passengers as in birds carrying suitcases, sharing a berth on a train, or traveling in bamboo cages on a ship, always migrating on a one-way to extinction. How would extinction look on a graph? A steady climb, or a plateau, then a precipitous cliff at the dawn of humans?
 
Nesting grounds eight hundred square miles in area. Skies swollen with darkening multitudes. Days and days of unbroken flocks passing over. Ectopistes migratorius.
 
And the last of the species, Martha, named for Martha Washington, dies in a cage in 1914 at the Cincinnati Zoo.
 
Forget clemency. We are the worst kind of predator, not even deliberate in our destruction. Our killing happens   la carte, on the side (side of Dodo?).
 
And because the nineteenth century did not enlist a battlefield artist for extinctions, there are no official witnesses to the slaughter, just participants. If you could somehow travel back to this scene, through the would-be canvas, you would run flailing your arms toward the hardwood forests and the men with sticks and guns and boiling sulphur pots to bring birds out of the trees, as if you could deliver 50,000 individual warnings, or throw yourself prostrate on the ground, as if your one body could hold sway.
 Ectopistes migratorius.side of Dodo?

All year, death, after death, after death. Then today look how majestically clouds float in the sky, God putting on a show of tenderness, nothing like thoughts that rise and drift in my mind, like flakes shaken in a snow globe, and my brain laboring in its own night, never feeling the punky starlight of dark thirty, the time a friend said for us to meet and had to explain it was half an hour after the first dark, when daylilies fold up and headlights lead the way home, but maybe too early to find the moon turning half its body away, holding it hidden like the black side of a mirror, unseen until it breaks, unexpectedly, the way grief breaks over you when you've already given all you've got and hands you tools you don't know how to use. The blush of dark thirty turned bleak when I heard about the O  O dark thirty, military time for 12:30 a.m., hour of the deepest dark, when, if I'm awake, as I often am, a storm of thoughts battle one another, now settling unsettlingly on the ways we make war and flaunt it. Take the Civil War double cannon the lawn of a city hall in the deep south, twinned so that two cannonballs chained together kill two at a time, often decapitating. And why did a small town, population 932, in rural New Hampshire, import a ballistic missile to crown its village green? Brecht's line floats up: "Pity the nation that needs heroes," but what to do with the guy pontificating on the Middle East, telling me with the gravest authority  that of stupidity the reason for the strife there: "Hatred is in the rocks."

 
D always felt, somehow or other, double. He was an upright line, but then again, he was a curve. When he looked in the mirror straight on, he saw the dapper features of the diplomat he was. But sideways, if he took off his horn-rimmed glasses, he imagined he could be taken for a rather distinguished Dame. He always saw both sides to everything.
     Would he ever find his d mon the divine spirit within? Did he really have one spirit? D seemed to be singing a duet with himself.
     Seeing both sides made him a champion procrastinator. D dilly-dallied. Waited till the last minute to decide anything. At every posting, he drove the staff crazy. But that was diplomacy.
     Now dusk dropped on the gated embassy grounds. D flipped on his desk lamp, and the pool of light shut out the trees, looming and dissolving. D drew the drapes, deaf to the delicate drone of insect wings. He returned to his desk, trying to distract himself from a strange little pain that had come to him all his life, like a recurrent dream. (Except, he had to confess, he never dreamed.) The pain was a distinct tiny stab in a spot, well, what would you call that? D called it down there.
     For years, since he was a little d, he considered all the options about this strange pain. It was nothing, really. He went long times between feeling it. Maybe it was too slight to worry about, but then again . . . At last D decided to see a doctor. As a matter of fact, he saw a number.
      Tell me your dreams,  the first doctor said.
      Don't bother to ask me, I never dream,  D said.
      In dreams begin responsibilities,  the doctor quoted.
     D demanded a referral.
      I've got a very specific pain,  he said to the next doctor. He pointed to, well, down there.
       Your testicle,  the physician said. Which required a test. Several. And more.
      Finally the second doctor read all the results and announced,  Aha, a dermoid cyst.  What? Inside the cyst were hair follicles and an eye-type thing with eyelashes and a tooth.
      Do you think I was a twin?  D wondered with a weird kind of delight as he examined the x-ray.
     Well, the doctor wouldn t go that far. These dermoid cysts were usually removed in childhood. No reason, however, to remove it now. D wouldn t dream of having it removed! It explained everything! That slightly creepy darling little creature in there must have been a twin, someone D had grown around as she dissolved. D was convinced it was a twin sister.
     And D had absorbed her. Of course he wanted to keep her with him.
     That very day, he had his first dream.
     Exhausted after his discovery, he had returned to the embassy in the late afternoon. Unable to face his office, he diverted his steps from the front walk toward the deserted path on the grounds where no one ever seemed to stroll. He walked deeper into the woods. The path sloped into a shaded dimple in the earth.
     It was dusk in the dell.
     D heard the drone of insect wings. In the mottled light a dragonfly dove straight down. Up curved a damselfly.
     Impulsively D lay down in the leaves in his three-piece suit and curled up like a praying divine, two hands under his chin. He felt himself melting a little. All the old bedevilments dispersed into a delicate dampness. The world softened from darkling to darling . . . 
 
. . . A stately antlered stag appeared in the distance and slowly, with a calm command, walked closer until D could see that he wore a diamond necklace around his neck. The stag slowly bowed his head, doffed his entire rack of antlers, and raised his head up again, looking directly at D.     Now the deer was a doe! The doe blinked her eyes at D, as if waking. Then she donned the antlers, and turned and walked away . . .
 
D woke up ravenously hungry and overjoyed.
     He dusted himself off and drove straight to dinner. As he stared out the restaurant window, eating his dumplings, he wondered if responsibilities really do begin in dreams.
     Maybe dreams are responsible to us, he thought.
     He felt his sister inside him. She was the reason he was a debonair man, a man who understood that everything has two sides: inner/outer, yes/no. D thought both in lines as sharp as the creases in trousers, and in curves like the swirls of a skirt.     What do I really know? he asked himself. Only that he had woken strangely endeared to himself and satisfied. Now he understood the necessity of delay. To wait, and then to discover. Never to have only one answer.
     The napkin at the restaurant had come rolled inside a little sparkly ring.  Add this to my bill,  he said to the waiter. And pocketed the little diadem as a reminder of the dyad he was. 
 one down there.must A stately antlered stag appeared in the distance and slowly, with a calm command, walked closer until D could see that he wore a diamond necklace around his neck. The stag slowly bowed his head, doffed his entire rack of antlers, and raised his head up again, looking directly at D.     Now the deer was a doe! The doe blinked her eyes at D, as if waking. Then she donned the antlers, and turned and walkedaway . . .Maybe dreams are responsible to us,      What do I really know? 

 Good Barber of the Pea!  I exhumed, high into the vag where the barber keeps his pea     Good Sprout!  His mouth, his gray and hunted tongue always in the distance  "No use denying we master the particular service we deny ourselves. In the shade of this pea (the sum of his shade and the gavel flexing above his head) I will become a milliner to cover what work I ve done. Or else, I ll begin anew   at the infant chin, where nothing grows but chins!  Outside, snails, vines, surpass me and must gaining pews upon pews. But don t think for a sec I don t know the way out of here, that release is one hair spiral stair top of which cleavage evaporates 

from the sustaining air fresh air There is the clarity of a shore And shadow,   mostly,   brilliance summer                 the billows of August When, wandering, I look from my page I say nothing       when asked I am, finally, an incompetent, after all

Here comes Shitty Kitty en route to the Gulf of Tonkin or en route to a race riot? That is the question and meanwhile discipline is the keystone and meanwhile did you see on TV helicopters being ditched into the sea? That is also my film and meanwhile all refugees must be treated as suspects. Looking for your husband? Looking for your son? That is the question and meanwhile she was the mother of the boy or that is what the translator said or Shitty Kitty or shall we adhere to traditional concepts of military discipline tempered with humanitarianism? That is the question and meanwhile South Korea exports military labor left over from the war. That is also my history or is that your history? That is the question and meanwhile             (CHORUS: Dictator Park Chung Hee and his soldiers in Ray-Bans)             How much?           $7.5 million=per division           or Binh Tai massacre=$7.5 million           or Binh Hoa massacre=$7.5 million           or Dien Nien Phuoc Binh massacre=$7.5 million           or Go Dai massacre=$7.5 milion           or Ha My massacre=$7.5 million           or Phong Nhi & Phong Nhat massacre=$15 million           or Tay Vinh massacre=$7.5 million           or Vinh Xuan massacre=$7.5 million           or Mighty History? That is the question and meanwhile a riot began over a grilled cheese sandwich at Subic Bay. Discrimination or perception? That is the question and meanwhile the sailor refused to make a statement or translate? That is the question and meanwhile twenty-six men all black were charged with assault and rioting and meanwhile did you translate? That is my question and meanwhile lard or Crisco? Aye, aye, sir!              (Anti-CHORUS: kittens in frilly white bonnets, bibs, and mittens)                                                           K I T T Y  S O N G                                                        I, aye-aye-sir!                                                   I, crazy-daisy-sir!                                                 I, export-quality-sir!                                                    I, grill-grill-sir!                                                 I, meow-meow-sir!                                                   I, kitty-litter-sir!            (Anti-CHORUS: kittens in frilly white bonnets, bibs, and mittens)                                                          K I T T Y  S O N G                                                       K I T T Y  S O N G                                                        I, aye-aye-sir!                                                   I, crazy-daisy-sir!                                                 I, export-quality-sir!                                                    I, grill-grill-sir!                                                 I, meow-meow-sir!                                                   I, kitty-litter-sir!

The floor, moonlit, the moon behind you, is not enclosed by walls; a patch of sky is hidden by distant trees. But a patch of floor is  itself hidden by the sky s legs, standing on it, and this cannot be the  opportunity for useless thoughts.Translated from the FrenchTranslated from the French

its method is men the fact and the game disorder grounded expressed real named the facts of life the planet its field   the same day vehicles lived by the masses become contemplative attitudes powered by the joys of this world a glorious sign propagated with lightning speed   at the same time its goal the use of time the speed of transport the margin of life the rational journeys by another path none of it bad   the work from his world themselves rediscovers nature its essential green easily seen through like a window but intimate like a summer meadow as a result cold dreams draw misty truths to the surface official forgetfulness looks back on and chooses to forget the first half of to focus discussion on the second half like "I'm fine" as a journey all to itself and beautiful to the voyager particularly this service its servants our passage of time vanishes quickly like a leaf its eulogy a terrestrial paradise the very spirit of the renaissance to act on the basis of an obsession with death well, death pronounce it be-u-ti-full slowly revealed to eliminate this lived time men live in sea turtles to the laws  

I maaku You told me ba ko tangirai I maaku I maaku My arms were awkward so ko taua baiu I maaku I maaku The dancer trembles because te ruoia is a kind of sorcery I maaku I maaku The frigate birds fly high above us and I m afraid of falling I maaku

Refuse to make eye contact with the subject. He has been following you around the gallery. You are certain that he can see down your shirt. Look at other subjects, but know that they, too, are not of primary interest. Even when they watch you. Try not to consider what happened to the small girl staring furiously, the thin-faced woman wanly looking away. Do not think about what they had for breakfast, if the bread was hard. Certainly do not consider the odors underneath their arms and skirts. Do not allow a breeze into the room they sit in. Do not assume I am talking about any painting: step away from the subject. All subject. Was the painter in love? Do not ask the question. Imagine you are the painter, blocking out everything you don t want to see. Everything is out of the picture. Stop looking. Stop seeking what isn t there. Tuck your narratives back in your pocket. Look for perspective, light, shade. Let your eyes wander back to the girl. She is trying to say something but her mouth has been painted deliberately shut. Her lips, thin.

Even here? In this snowbound barrack?   Suddenly, the illicit sounds of Beethoven s concerto   erupt from Juliek s smuggled violin, suffusing this doomsday shed   teeming with the trampled and the barely alive,   realm of frostbite and squalor, clawing panic and suffocation    Insane, God of Abraham, insanely beautiful:   a boy insisting winter cannot reign forever,   a boy conveying his brief, bounded life   with a psalmist s or a cantor s arrow-sure ecstasy    One prison-striped friend endures to record   the spellbinding strings, the woebegone    and the other, the impossible Polish fiddler,   is motionless by morning, his renegade instrument   mangled under the haggard weight   of winter-killed, unraveling men. Music at the brink of the grave,   eloquent in the pitch dark, tell-true, indelible,   as never before, as never after   Abundance, Abundance, emending beauty,emending beauty,  linger in the listening,linger in the listening,truth-carrying soul of Elie,truth-carrying soul of Elie,  soul become slalom swift,soul become slalom swift,camp shrewd, uncrushable;camp shrewd, uncrushable;  abundance, be here, always here,abundance, be here, always here,in this not-yet-shattered violin.in this not-yet-shattered violin.

Lash everything irredeemable to the ficus with muscle. Use the flexor digitorum brevis from the arch of my right foot. This is how what s grounded gets hitched to the rooted, everything cramped into place and contemplative. Tight striations might as well be bindings to Bodhi as body. Why not dump this tired mind at the foot of a tree, aerial roots less caustic than an unanswered calling    or perhaps this is it, to sit, to ponder, to ask: what violated cunt, what unhappy gasp, what sad spat, and toppling building left us blooming untoward? Who puts flowers on the inside of a fig except the injured or the bereft? The ones who hankered hard and failed to do anything but live lush and fallible? What regret is: bark or bitch. The world succumbs to beauty even now, in the throes. The sky is dark and hidden behind branches, cephalic veins clotted with grief. Hush now, finally. All the face can do is flush, sympathetic nervous system, visible horror of wounded and wounding. All inflorescence remains safe inside that place the mind opens up pear- shaped and vast: the body of every lover is unattached to hurt or hope, falls in its own field of daffodils, to curl fetal with singular prowess or glut.

She arrived at the country mansion in a silver limousine. She d sent out invitations and everything: her name written twice with  &  in the middle,& the calligraphy of coupling. She strode down the aisle to  At Last  by Etta James, faced the celebrant like a keen soldier reporting for duty, her voice shaky yet sure. I do. I do.  You may now kiss the mirror.  Applause. Confetti. Every single one of the hundred and forty guests deemed the service  unimprovable.  Especially the vows. So  from the heart.  Her wedding gown was ivory; pointedly off-white,  After all, we ve shared a bed for thirty-two years,  she quipped in her first speech,  I m hardly virginal if you know what I mean.  (No one knew exactly what she meant.)exactly Not a soul questioned their devotion. You only had to look at them. Hand cupped in hand. Smiling out of the same eyes. You could sense their secret language, bone-deep, blended blood. Toasts were frequent, tearful. One guest eyed his wife   hovering harmlessly at the bar   and imagined what his life might ve been if he d responded, years ago, to that offer in his head: I m the only one who will ever truly understand you. I m the only one who will ever truly understand you. Marry me, Derek. I love you. Marry me.  At the time, he hadn t taken his proposal seriously. He recharged his champagne flute, watched the newlywed cut her five-tiered cake, both hands on the knife.  Is it too late for us to try?  Derek whispered to no one, as the bride glided herself onto the dance floor, taking turns first to lead then follow.

The lights come on and stay on under the trees. Visibly a whole neighborhood inhabits the dusk, so punctual and in place it seems to deny dark its dominion. Nothing will go astray, the porch lamps promise. Sudden, as though a match failed to ignite at the foot of the garden, the first squibs trouble the eye. Impossible not to share that sportive, abortive, clumsy, where-are-we-now dalliance with night, such soothing relentlessness. What should we make of fireflies, their quick flare of promise and disappointment, their throwaway style? Our heads turn this way and that. We are loath to miss such jauntiness in nature. Those fugitive selves, winged and at random! Our flickery might-have-beens come up form the woods to haunt us! Our yet-to-be as tentative frolic! What do fireflies say? That loneliness made of light becomes at last convivial singleness? That any antic spark cruising the void might titillate creation? And whether they spend themselves, or go to ground, or drift with their lights out, they have left the gloom, for as long as our eyes take to absorb such absence, less than it seemed, as childless and deprived as Chaos and Old Night. But ruffled, too, as though it unearthed some memory of light from its long blackout, a hospitable core fit home for fireflies, brushed by fireflies' wings.

Bungle is the password A slight matter of a deposit secures you the night's blank face on the large crude banknote I offer all the grease that's ever been on my palm as advice: Don't breathe in the lights of evening Moonshine hits the can bounces off and consumes the drapes I'm talking about herehere where we meet at the emergency water supply One man and one woman gets you one of each and some shadows A caress in the breeze A caress please so much? You can't even die without touching, you can't sweeten the fat street of faces                 without touch I don't retain the melody that set me, dressed as I am, in motion in marriage with myself It ain't no honeymoon to take off my breast and play it So it happens you notice me in my canary shorts and my crimson fez Twunk twunkity twunk My thumb piano, my  very open eyes

the management organized the company and that was splendid enough chairs for all a quick change of clothes and scene brings us to the lawn of the company stretching out under our gaze which itself beer in hand stops short of the horizon (grazes) everything else vanished a certain rhythm (uncertain) of the blood directed attention to the tapping foot was this happiness being witnessed was this many weeks did the people over there look same as the people over there (hmm)     who were they were they salesmen     could we brush aside the tapping that by now had given way to winking and that to sleeping and then to tapping again what was being what was being covered up      was it a fabulous shoulder gleaming     was it an exact (and exacting) self-image suffering no monkey business     were they happy     did the countryside bloom, did not subside who were they     were they salesmen     and given fresh air and sun     who were their wives     were they salesmen, too  from here they look organized and like good company not to overlook the flowers and facts what were they doing here     had they been invited     did they receive invitations     with what grace was it many weeks     they "you bet I am" emotion reflected (a shoulder)     whose were they sales men (and women) did they make rounds     and (ooph) how spiffy did they look      did they look up as the management passed threading toward the logo-decorated dais were they former salesmen (and women)     did they look it     what was their country of origin     was it organized     who did they think they were     (or weren't) how did they look in the light of the flowers of the facts were they news     the kidding aside the beer flowed the lawn rolled endlessly in and out like a boat a picture of waves     was a storm brewing     when vacations came around were they still to be salesmen (and women)     and retirement what about retirement but who could be retiring under the gentle hand of unlimited beer and lawn were those beer-colored storm clouds rolling in were they invited     were they salesmen (and women)     where did they come from     would they go away could they be covered up      why were they unresponsive to good sense      and why were they gleaming did this look like a good place for rain to retire in would rain fall without invitation     would it spoil the company what effect would it have on self-image would the people look the same after the rain     were they salesmen (and women)     why were they gleaming     did the self-image include shoulders were they inviting were they cloud-like were they salesmen (and women) organized to manage a quick change was the self-image good company was it a salesman or a saleswoman invited to be a manager would they make the dais what about the clouds were there enough chairs for all the managers would they live happy in those chairs after they were managers     would they settle for chairs  

In the film that doesn t begin and never ends, a man wakes, drives to a country farmhouse where he finds the guests he knows from his recurring dream, each   telling their own strange tale to him, the architect called in to pitch his new design a fratricidal son, that ventriloquist whose dummy mouths his life    progressive horror, till from his nightmare the man wakes, drives to a country farmhouse where he finds the guests he knows from his recurring dream. . . .   So with Dead of Night, Bondi, Gold, and Hoyle wakeDead of Night,  to their design, the universe a Steady State, a cloud that never moves from its mountaintop, one droplet   added for every one lost. Or like our own bodies freshened cell by cell, creation continuous, God-less, and atoms bred from atoms from alchemical stars.   You drive with Hoyle in the hills above Montalcino, the cloth merchant s son, outspoken, caustic, truant, who would label you comically  The Big Bang Man,    arguing the probabilities:  What matter, Fred, creates itself?   Nothing, my dear Georges, then in an instant a universe?  All that is, is, is spinning on a pencil point.   And you in his dinner portrait of you, a Friday fast, coveting his steak, the enormous, undesired fish appearing to stay the same size however much you eat.

It seems I have always sat here watching men like you    who turn heads, whose gaze is always either a kiss or a slap or the whiplash of pure disregard. Why fret? All you re doing is walking. You re this year s It, theIt one righteous integer of cool cruising down a great-lipped channel of hushed adoration, women turned girls again, brightening in spite of themselves. That brave, wilting smile   you don t see it, do you? How she tells herself to move on; blinks until she can.

Don't ask me who I'm speaking for who I'm talking to why I'm doing what I do in the light of my existence You rise you spit you brush you drink you pee you shit you walk you run you work you eat you belch you sleep you dream & that's the way it is In the morning tap water tasted fishy coffee sits in its decaffeinated cup caca & incense have a floating romance & a stale washcloth will make you smell doubly stale so don't get kissed on the cheek don't get licked on the neck at 8 a.m. the trains & buses are packed with folks farting their bread & butter farts the gymnasium is dominated by the stench of hot tennis shoes & one in the locker room  a few silly-talking intellectual-looking coke-drinking cloth-dropping paper-littering spinach-pooting smug arrogant women wait to be waited on & in another locker room there are odors of crotches & jock straps bengay, tiger balm & burning balls sweat socks & sweat suits of body-building door-slamming iron-pumping phlegm-hawking men all sour & steamy & wrapped up together in a swamp of butt-popping towels but don't let it get you down don't let it psych you up Outside the ledges are loaded with pigeons clouds are seeded with homeless people & lyricism of the afternoon in a sub-proletarian madman squatting & vomiting from his bowels a brown liquid of death in front of your house & it's not happening because of you  those socks don't stink because of me a bureaucrat is not a jerk because of us I'm not this way because of them you're not that way because of me don't ask about influences You rise you spit you brush you drink you pee you shit you walk you run you work you eat you belch you sleep you dream & that's the way it is

My departure from the city of O.? I took no leave.   I d learned to sleep angry.   On a train I was contained.   The water under the bridge was just that. Shunned metaphor.   It did not send waves of regret or make me reflect. It did not baptize, wash away, or cleanse.   The countryside appeared like the sides of any country where rain falls and cows chew yellow flowers.   The world was not too much or too much with me.   I stomached it.   In the photograph I only look lonely because I was alone.   You cannot see the envelope on my lap or the letters lodged under sweaters in my suitcase.   I carried only one bag, what I could manage in a crowd.   You can imagine I held a thick book from which nothing could distract me. You can imagine my head high, eyes dry.   I did not see my departure as a failure, or a fall. I d dodged a bullet. Been reborn.    You can imagine it that way.   Only none of it was like that, not like that at all.  

let through praise while cycling  a hill or shop to match you  the shining bay the foggy gray beneath all names and phrases     let through praise while working  a bird or book to watch you  the formal sun the queerer ones lifting their heads to face you     let through praise while flirting  a storm or song to patch you  the iced-down bruise the new black shoes and all the things that make you     let praise through earthly city  a sibling glad to catch us  the blameless meek the faceless deep please mind your house and graces

If this is a fracture across time and place, where past and future hold each other s gaze, then should the world not call a moment s halt, not hang like a fly-cloud at head-height when a downpour ends? Should it not let fireworks burst, then hold their sculpted light? Then we will see the glory of this wild, this liberated city, where everyone is held in green, red, gold of roman-candle arcs and rocket seed-heads. We walk among the rescued in their newly crowded bars. A couple caught mid-kiss across their table, waiter balanced on one foot with eyes of steel and arms of plates. A self-appointed prophet in a shirt and tie gapes, fish-like, caught halfway through a lie. I could lean and wet my fingertip in stilled champagne, tilted on a singer s lip. You could grab a smoke ring from the ether between punters and the pole dancer, pocket it as proof, then we could take the air beside the float-glass river, where a busker rests her bow on a string, and you ask what are all these flesh-ghosts thinking?what are all these flesh-ghosts thinking? Far from a cheap trick, this city-wide hiatus, the cost per minute is prohibitive. We barely linger in this midnight space before words rush back, before kiss meets kiss.

Oh, we fear our enemy s mind, the shape in his thought that resembles the cripple in our own, for it s not just his fear we fear, but his love and his paradise.   We fear he will deprive us of our peace of mind, and, fearing this, are thus deprived, so we must go to war, to be free of this terror, this unremitting fear, that he might   he might, he might. Oh it s hard to saymight.  what he might do or feel or think.might  Except all that we cannot bear of feeling or thinking so his might   must be met with might of armor and of intent informed by all the hunker down within the bunker of ourselves. How does he love? and eat? and drink?   He must be all strategy or some sick lie. How can reason unlock such a door, for we bar it too with friends and lovers, in waking hours, on ordinary days?   Finding the other so senseless and unknown, we go to war to feel free of the fear of our own minds, and so come to ruin in our hearts of ordinary days.  

A fourth was needed so one of the three Invited a friend and I came along as a spare In case a chair was empty since I could fill In as easily as I could shout out a rhyme. As the jive flowed like the River Jordan And Joshua and his trumpets sounded the alarm The winning cards slam damned on the table And I laughed along with morning noon and night. My three big brothers: bold smart handsome. One slim as a stick of dynamite, the second solid As a line backer and the third crazy enough To fight them both if they let it roll beyond talk. Treated me like a child even after I had my first. The three of them (ace king and a wild card) Improbably born within four years as if Daddy And Momma were trying to break a record Or win a bet about how many diapers a woman Could change in a single day without cursing The hand God had dealt her; the odds were even Until I came along years later to tell their story.

It's hard to tell that the face of the moon is as much like a man's as god's. Out yonder, in the world without us, who's to say?   Either we get in the way, or things make use of us. Half-way around the globe from where they started, the static sound of starlings echoes off the barn roof. Spider weave in the spokes of wheels, and stars circle unsuspecting suns. Little do we know, the world has a talent for making itself at home. Meanwhile, we paint our self- portraits on everything imaginable, then hold them up like mirrors. Our mercurial brushes grow longer, our skills more acute. Dust clouds the vision, tinder to the eye. So we burn trees to save the forests, burn air to fly afar. We do, we say. We can. The time is close at hand. Time was (said a man)  you could tell the weather from the moon. That was before another broke   the quicksilver distance and walked all over it. Now you can't tell a thing.

It feels like I need To go to my dad's house And when I'm at my dad's house I want to go to my mom's house I want to be at both houses

I love them all. I love that a handful, a mouthful, gets you by, a satchelful can land you a job, a well-chosen clutch of them could get you laid, and that a solitary word can initiate a stampede, and therefore can be formally outlawed even by a liberal court bent on defending a constitution guaranteeing unimpeded utterance. I love that the Argentine gaucho has over two hundred words for the coloration of horses and the Sami language of Scandinavia has over a thousand words for reindeer based on age, sex, appearance e.g., a busat has big balls or only one big ball.busat  More than the pristine, I love the filthy ones for their descriptive talent as well as transgressive nature. I love the dirty ones more than the minced, in that I respect extravagant expression more than reserved. I admire reserve, especially when taken to an ascetic nth. I love the particular lexicons of particular occupations. The substrate of those activities. The nomenclatures within nomenclatures. I am of the unaccredited school that believes animals did not exist until Adam assigned them names. My relationship to the word is anything but scientific; it is a matter of faith on my part, that the word endows material substance, by setting the thing named apart from all else. Horse, then, unhorses what is not horse.Horse,   

She turns the bedlamp on. The book falls open  in her mottled hands, and while she reads her mouth begins to quiver, forming words  like Breathless. Promises. Elope.Breathless. Promises. Elope As she turns the leaves, Eudora's cheek takes on a bit of bloom. Her frowzy hair  thickens and turns gold, her dim eyes clear, the wattles vanish from her slender neck. Her waist, emerging from its ring of flesh,  bends to the side. Breasts that used to hang  like pockets rise and ripen; her long legs  tremble. Her eyes close, she holds her breath   the steamy pages flutter by, unread, as lover after lover finds her bed.

Oh, I said, this is going to be. And it was. Oh, I said, this will never happen. But it did. And a purple fog descended upon the land. The roots of trees curled up. The world was divided into two countries. Every photograph taken in the first was of people. Every photograph taken in the second showed none. All of the girl children were named And. All of the boy children named Then.

Would you rather hear the louche pun drawn  from glory hole, lip wrap or fingering  from glory hole, lip wrap or fingering glory hole, lip wrap fingering or hear a tiny hammer striking wire? Would you rather see the molten birthing glass? Would you rather see the molten birthing glass? Seat Eros next to Kronos, for the banter. I heard she s yet unplowed   I heard your quiver dangled down    I heardshe s yet unplowed   I heard your quiver dangled down   she s yet unplowed   I heard your quiver dangled down   I heard you dwell in borrowed forms   love s nothing but glimmer-to-wither, dawn s fireflies expired. I heard you dwell in borrowed forms   love s nothingbut glimmer-to-wither, dawn s fireflies expired.but glimmer-to-wither, dawn s fireflies expired. In this place we sift & bounce the words like dice thrice dip a pipe into the magma, o my stars. thrice dip a pipe into the magma, o my stars.o my stars Lear & Gloucester walk into a bar debating again the color of bluffs or moors debating again the color of bluffs or moors or cormorants: like craquelure     like damp tea leaf driftwood    no, peat steam    no, brined sand-apple ink like craquelure     like damp tea leafdriftwood    no, peat steam    no, brined sand-apple inkdriftwood    no, peat steam    no, brined sand-apple ink Were all your letters in fact suns? Forgotten, after all that trouble    Forgotten, after all that trouble    Are those bellows blowing some? A field of broken bottles, fragments blue. A field of broken bottles, fragments blue. A tune invented to divert a girl.

I got a letter through the post decreeing my sainthood. Beatified, I sat down, because this was big news for me. Bless the television, bless this chair of four wooden legs. I felt like calling my parents, but thought, in a saintly way, to do so would be immodest, so instead I opened the curtains. Rain was washing everything that seemed in need of washing. A bird landed on a bush and shook water from its wings and I closed my eyes briefly, acknowledging its small, hardworking soul, like a microchip destined for heaven. The cat came in, little devil, and I forgave her, touching under her chin, sweet child. We watched the news together and reflected that this was how the world churns its butter of beginnings and endings in front of the sun. What good, I wondered laterally, might befall an ancient tree today? Perhaps merely nothing much. Perhaps a tree will carry on just as it was. What minerals will develop unseen in the earth, deep beneath a human tragedy? Some minerals. Some salty, bright minerals in the dark. I spent that morning cutting white paper into triangles. I spent that afternoon staring at my bits, enamored. I spent that evening clapping loudly in the garden, and come bedtime I was ready to write my long email to the President of the United States of America.

couldn't stand to see these new young faces, these children swollen as myself.   my roommate, snotty, bragging about how she didn't give a damn about the kid and was going back to her boyfriend and be a cheerleader in high school.   could we ever "go back"?could we ever "go back"? would our bodies be the same? could we hide among the childless? she always reminded me of a lady at the bridge club in her mother's shoes, playing her mother's hand. i tried to get along, be silent, stay in my own corner. i only had a month to go too short to get to know them. but being drawn to the room down the hall, the t.v. room where, at night, we sat in our cuddly cotton robes and fleece-lined slippers like college freshmen, joking about the nuns and laughing about due dates jailbirds waiting to be sprung. one girl, taller and older, twenty-six or twenty-seven, kept to herself, talked with a funny accent, the pain on her face seemed worse than ours. . .   and a lovely, gentle girl with flat small bones.   the great round hump seemed to carry her around!   she neverher said an unkind word to anyone, went to church every morning with her rosary and prayed each night alone in her room. she was seventeen, diabetic, fearful that she or the baby or both would die in childbirth.   she wanted the baby, yet knew that to keep it would be wrong.   but what if the child did live?   what if she gave it up and could never have another? i couldn't believe the fear, the knowledge she had of death walking with her.   i never felt stronger, eating right, doing my exercises.     i was holding on to the core, the center of strength; death seemed remote, i could not imagine it walking in our midst, death in the midst of all that blooming.   she seemed sincere, but maybe she was lying. . . she went down two weeks late.   induced.   she had decided to keep the baby.   the night i went down, she had just gone into labor so the girls had two of us to cheer about. the next morning when i awoke, i went to see her.   she smiled from her hospital bed with tubes in her arms.   it had been a boy.   her baby was dead in the womb for two weeks.   i remembered she had complained no kicking.   weno kicking.   had reassured her everything was fine. meanwhile i worked in the laundry, folded the hospital fresh sheets flat three hours a day.   but never alone. stepping off the elevator, going up, feeling something, a spark catch.  i would put my hand there and smile with such a luminous smile, the whole world must be happy. or out with those crazy girls, those teenagers, laughing, on a christmas shopping spree, free (the only day they let us out in two months), feet wet and cold from snow. i felt pretty, body wide and still in black beatnik leotards, washed out at night.   my shapely legs and young body like iron. i ate well, wanted lamaze (painless childbirth) i didn't need a husband or a trained doctor i'd do it myself, book propped open on the floor, puffing and counting while all the sixteen-year-old unwed children smiled like i was crazy. one day i got a letter from my cousin, said:don't give your baby up don't give your baby up  you'll never be complete again you'll always worry where and how it is she knew!   the people in my family knew!   nobody died of grief and shame! i would keep the child.   i was sturdy.   would be a betterwould mother than my mother.    i would still be a doctor, study, finish school at night.   when the time came, i would not hurt like all those women who screamed and took drugs.  i would squat down and deliver just like the peasants in the field, shift my baby to my back, and continue when my water broke, when i saw that stain of pink blood on the toilet paper and felt the first thing i could not feel, had no control of, dripping down my leg, i heard them singing mitch miller xmas songs and came from the bathroom in my own pink song down the long hall, down the long moment when no one knew but me. it was time. all the girls were cheering when i went downstairs.   i was the one who told them to be tough, to stop believing in their mother's pain, that poison.   our minds were like telescopes looking through fear.   it wouldn't hurt like we'd been told.   birth was beautiful if we believed that it was beautiful and right and good!maternity i had never seen inside those doors.maternity i had never seen inside those doors all night i pictured the girls up there, at first hanging out of the windows, trying to get a glimpse of me. . . when the pain was worst, i thought of their sleeping faces, like the shining faces of children in the nursery.   i held onto that image of innocence like one light in the darkness.

She invents wilderness out of absence, erases houses, the husband, the sewer pipe and the suburb it empties. Leaving the sparrow, the snake. Daily walks in her Virginia suburb minus the curb. Biographers struggle to account for these years in the wilderness, the housewife off hiking. Maybe her Virginia should be a West Virginia: wilder, less money, the creek a holler not this empty cul-de-sac. Some days she erased all but the air, maybe the light. Husband of the space bar, carpool a clean section break. She became a man in the wilderness and won the Pulitzer. I told the truth, she said, only I left some out. What rises in such a clearing? What stays home checking and re-checking the egg.

Barbie Chang s tears are the lights of               the city that go off on off on the men walking around the city              move but Barbie Chang               doesn t she cannot promote herself if              she had legs she would               stop begging if she had a head she              would stop her own               wedding but the city has no extra              bedding it is not               ready yet the maids are still making              beds Barbie Chang is               still making things up there are always              storms long arms drinks               with pink umbrellas because they know              she is confused like a               seahorse light avoids her town on              the map B2 C4 she               wants to be used she doesn t want to              be with you it is morning               again and Barbie Chang is already              mourning the men the               night men who are always right who              never write back               she prefers to sleep on her back so she              can see the eyes of her               attackers in the morning a bed with              questions with her               depression on each side two small              holes from knees              

there was a rude boy on my jean jacket. black suit, shades and hat, skanking where orange street met birmingham. two-tone ska a second skin, a way to believe, though unsure why. days on this island with wasted republican frat boys and sorority girls, pompous u.s citizens, northern americanos with trust funds. only white dudes in sight without reagan hair are in the front of the car, a sputtering nondescript, and later pugs, the skinhead in boots and leather below unfiltered sun, unsure if peyote caps or heat is source of glistening blister of a head. an equally overdressed chubby blonde woman at his side who he swears sounds just like janis. on cue, val fills the hotel courtyard where my misfit crew hope for a corner of a floor not coated in puke or recent sex rented by bobcat s brother s sigma hate niggas fraternity. her dense wail careens off ten stories like a friday night public address system. so close to another why not join the hollow migration? us, funboy three, avoiding the same people in a different country. tequila, laughter and respect. then border patrol. stinking agave as he checks licenses and cargo space. when he opens the back door, rudy rests beside skinny black sophomore with a flat top. one front pocket open, the other concealing skunk. i consider what dank brick lines the cells, how long i will drink sweat because it tastes better than juarez prison chow. he reaches in the open pocket, returns rude boy to the seat. welcome home, boys. enjoy yourself, he says. it s later than you think.

Somewhere, people must still do things like fetch water from wells in buckets, then pour it out for those animals that, long domesticated, would likely perish before figuring out how to get for themselves. That dog, for example, whose refusal to leave my side I mistook, as a child, for loyalty   when all along it was just blind ... What is it about vulnerability that can make the hand draw back, sometimes, and can sometimes seem the catalyst for rendering the hand into sheer force, destructive? Don t you see how you ve burnt almostDon t you see how you ve burnt almost all of it, all the tenderness, away, someone screams to someone else, in public   and looking elsewhere, we walk quickly past, as if even to have heard that much might have put us at risk of whatever fate questions like that                                      spring from. Estrangement    like sacrifice   begins as a word at first, soon it s the stuff of drama, cue the follow-up tears that attend drama, then it s pretty much the difference between waking up to a storm and waking up inside one. Who can say how she got there    in the ocean, I mean   but I once watched a horse make her way back to land mid-hurricane: having ridden, surfer-like, the very waves that at any moment could have overwhelmed her in their crash to shore, she shook herself, looked back once on the water s restlessness    history s always restless   and the horse stepped free.

Prairie winds blaze through her tumbled belly, and Emmett s red yesterdays refuse to rename her any kind of mother. A pudge-cheeked otherwise, sugar whistler, her boy is (through the fierce clenching mouth of her memory) a grays-and-shadows child. Listen. Once she was pretty.Listen Windy hues goldened her skin. She was pert, brown-faced, in every wide way the opposite of the raw, screeching thing chaos has crafted. Now, threaded awkwardly, she tires of thesorries, the Lawd have mercies. Grief s damnable tintsorriesLawd have mercies is everywhere, darkening days she is no longer aware of. She is gospel revolving, repeatedly emptied of light, pulled and caressed, cooed upon by strangers, offered pork and taffy. Boys in the street stare at her, then avert their eyes, as if she killed them all, shipped every one into the grips of Delta. She sits, her chair carefully balanced on hell s edge, and pays for sanity in kisses upon the conjured forehead of her son. Beginning with A, she recites (angry, away, awful) the alphabet of a world gone red.angry, away, awful Coffee scorches her throat as church ladies drift about her room, black garb sweating their hips, filling cups with tap water, drinking, drinking in glimpses of her steep undoing. The absence of a black roomful of boy is measured, again, again. In the clutches of coffee, red-eyed, Mamie knows their well-meaning murmur. One says SheShe a mama, still. Once you have a chile, you always a mama. Kisses in multitudes rain from their dusty Baptist mouths, drowning her.Sit still, she thinks, til they remember how your boy was killed.Sit stilltil they remember how your boy was killed She remembers. Gush and implosion, crushed, slippery, not a boy. Taffeta and hymnals all these women know, not a son lost and pulled from the wretched and rumbling Tallahatchie. Mamie, she of the hollowed womb, is nobody s mama anymore. She is tinted echo, barren. Everything about her makes the sound sorry.The white man s hands on her child, dangled eye, twanging chaos,The white man s hands on her child, dangled eye, twanging chaos things that she leans on, the only doors that open to let her in. Faced with days and days of no him, she lets Chicago   windy, pretty in the ways of the North   console her with its boorish grays. A hug, more mourners and platters of fat meat. Will she make it through? Is this how the face slap of sorrow changes the shape of a mother? All the boys she sees now are laughing, drenched in red. Emmett, in dreams, sings I am gold. He tells how dry it is, the prairie.I am gold

Strand. String. In this dream, the paths cross and cross again. They are spelling a real boy out of repetition.        Each one is the one real boy. Each knows he must be wrong about this, but he can t feel how.       The fish and the fisherman, the pilot, the princess, the fireman and the ones on fire.

I walked along Rue du Faubourg du Temple on the way to Belleville and I stopped at a shop selling rat poison. To my astonishment and my amusement they had a window full of stuffed rats, including four small rats standing round a table, playing cards. I liked that very much. Paris was full of weird turnarounds, it seemed   poisoning and elevating the rats to art at the same time. I nearly went in and asked how much the four rats and the tiny table would cost, but I remembered I d be going back to Ireland pretty soon, and the people at airport security might not see the joke.It was not the first time I d seen rat poison on sale here. Paris seemed to have a problem with rats. Someone I d met for lunch recently had said she d seen them running around the M tro platform when she was coming home once around midnight. I remembered a rat had made a dramatic appearance in one of Baudelaire s little poems in prose. A rich boy had lost interest in his expensive toy because he d seen a poor boy poking a rat in an improvised cage. I m pretty sure that wasn t an invention on Baudelaire s part   lots of poor parents probably thought of giving their children (or at least, their sons) rats as pets. Hadn t I had a pet mouse myself? The rich boy who d seen the rat certainly was delighted at the idea of having the creature as a pet.Many years ago a friend of mine who worked as a chef gave me his original copy of Larousse Gastronomique   an edition first published in the 1920s or 30s. In there, I think, was a recipe called Cassoulet de Grand Souris. This was basically rat meat given the coq au vin or boeuf bourguignon treatment, i.e. cooked in red wine with mushrooms and tiny onions. I can t remember which top Parisian restaurant introduced the dish onto their menu during the Siege of Paris in 1870 71, but apparently it proved very popular. It made sense too, as the Siege lasted for more than four months, and no meat was getting in, while rats were plentiful, then as now. I seem to recall the menus of the time sometimes also included rat salami, and a rat sauce called Sauce Robert. It s no use looking in a current edition of Larousse as the book has been cleaned up   all mention of rats have been removed.Larousse GastronomiqueCassoulet de Grand Souriscoq au vinboeuf bourguignonSauce RobertLarousseI had some experience of rats when I was a child in Donegal.  I commonly saw water rats swimming in the stream or small river that flowed behind my primary school. The house I grew up in had rats under the floorboards. I used to love spending time under the stairs, and sometimes the rats would come in through a hole in the back. I don t remember ever having been afraid of them but I never touched them or wanted them to walk on top of me. And I certainly never thought of capturing one and making it my pet. My little pink-eyed albino mouse was rodent enough for me, and even that was a trial for my mother.

A martyr this morning, as ever, to cramps and pains I organize myself to face the day. I show a leg, put my shoulder to the wheel, Daub paint on my eyelids and stick a couple of long Hairpins in my desperate mane to hold it  Too much trouble even to brush my hair.   I start on the spot on this heavy, sluggish, Difficult, heartbreaking work, the reason no doubt I was first put on the earth. I take the same little plastic brush that I use On good days to spread melted butter on pastry. And gradually lay bare with insect patience, Sifting away like an ant, with a hunter s eye, or   The sharp ear of a trespassing pig, alternately huffing And puffing and effing and blinding: in the wet sand, The painful lines of our horror, the boundaried frame of fear, That lays us low so often in the bogs of despond. You d take it as first for a boat s skeleton, a kind Of Sutton Hoo for our people, but soon its true shape appears: Biblical Behemoth, the monster of all the old tales.  

Mosquitoes, with needle-noses sucking blood from elbows, cheeks, and chin why were you not designed to thrive on brine, on swine, or likewise-spiny porcupines?                        SLAP! SLAP!                                           SLAP!

It was necessary to move, and at this exit the beggar, cross-legged at the fork of the tunnel, calls out Love! A welcome, of sorts.Love! A                  The night light fucks the suburb into nightmare familiarity   not like a shrammed nerd touting guided walks and histories that contract imagination for demolition work, levelling today's housing, restoring common greens, lingering at sites orphaned of their fever hospitals   by no means that hyperliterate, poor entrepreneur   It is the view, the barbed wire roaring into view round and round the playground walltop. It is the warehouse, warehouse windows blank of occupation. It is lives, lives supplied in great number, fulfilment of numbers. It is the sense of something shared   the tailor scissors razoring open fishmouth stitches, the sewn-up pocket of the new suit, and finding something   But it is new, all new, even the gangs who graffiti chimneys scrubbed and lovely, deleted like the railways delete repeatedly the head, the occasionally payrolled head, the feet of the quartered commuters, of the vertebral week.  

My brother is still alive and living In Fresno.   All day he stares at the dead bodies Of automobiles   In his garage. It isn t a prison He d wish himself free of.   I visit him, Dragging my boxes   Of books and awards Behind me.   We are walking out of the city Into the white flame of the desert.   Not unlike the Desert Fathers walking out into Sinai.   My brother carries his briefcase Loaded in icons and dollar bills.   He is wearing Larry Levis s shining Suit and black leather boots.   I am wearing a pale gown Of sun-bleached flowers.   We are talking About the Resurrection.   We are walking dead Into it   Leaving the world and its sweet chorus Of horrors behind.   There is no city But the city within.   No door, but the door To simple wisdom.   We walk, dumb As newborns   Into the tremendous and endless Blessing.  

Day after day of rain. A ticket straight to the mild-mannered hell of rethinking whatever, the drive to EconoFoods: not a lot of grief in that. You need staples   bread, rice, eggs. Here s a list: almonds, yogurt, all the little anti-griefs add up. Did I tell you? my grandfather sings from the grave. They have my old Philco here. I know all about your world of godawful and too bad. I keep driving. In rain. Some luck required. Stop light. Flashy cars on both sides playing radios too loud. Ear damage! I used to shout out the window, my boy in the front seat trying hard to shrink, not to know who is that crazy at the wheel.is Grandfather likes saying: what? Half-deaf even now. Half a lot of things, anytime. Half, what gives? giving way. If there is a we or a you or an I finally. He d cup an ear if he had an ear. So it is, the first anti-grief, a feather he picked up. My childhood, walking with the oldest man I ever, 1874 his start date. Alarm and Should Have, two roads he would not cross, and Consequence a street over, he ignored completely. Always an eye out for the great small peculiar. A feather. Sometimes handed to me. Or he d oil a clock with it right off the curb. Into a pocket.

Moonpoison, mullock of sacrifice, Suffuses the veins of the eyes Till the retina, mooncoloured, Sees the sideways motion of the cretin crab Hued thus like a tortoise askew in the glaucous moonscape A flat hot boulder it Lividly in the midst of the Doldrums Sidles The lunatic unable to bear the silent course of constellations Mad and stark naked Sidles The obol on an eyeball of a man dead from elphantiasis Sidles All three across heaven with a rocking motion. The Doldrums: 'region of calms and light baffling winds near Equator.' But the calms are rare The winds baffling but not light And the drunken boats belonging to the Crab Club Rock hot and naked to the dunning of the moon All in the pallescent Sargasso weed And windbound, seeking distraction by the light of deliverance For What are we but the excrement of non-existent noon?      (Truth like starlight crookedly) What are we all but 'burial grounds abhorred by the moon'? And did the Maoris die of measles? So do we. But there is no snow here, nor lilies. The night is glutinous In a broad hearth crisscross thorn clumps Smoulder: distant fireback of copse Throws back silence: glassen ashes gleam in pond The constellations which have stopped working (?) Shimmer. No dead leaf jumps. On edge of lawn a glowworm Hangs out its state-recognized torchlamp Blocks of flowers gape dumb as windows with blinds drawn And in the centre the rugate trees Though seeming as if they go up in smoke Are held like cardboard where they are. Bluehot it is queer fuel to make the moon move. Agesias said: 'Nero was an artist because he murdered his mother Sensibility (subliminal) is of more importance than moral obligation           (prandial).'      But Agesias paints cottages in watercolours and fears his own mother. Barbarieus said: 'I am passionately in love with Gito who spurns me for            Praxino '      But until he saw them together he was merely disturbed by Gito's                eyelashes. Gal nus said: 'The subsequent shrivelling of an orchid doesn't alter the          value of its beauty.' Decanus said: 'Joy in nothing. Either dies joy or what produced it.'      But Gal nus is attractive to women, Decanus obese, poor, obtuse. Epinondas said: 'I have been a liar, now no longer so.' Zeuxias said: 'What I have always been, I shall remain, a fool."      Is it better to be self-deceived or lazy? Epator was drunk for two days: Theodorus traced his disease to college,           Iphogen s saw God and died, And so down the Alphabet, ate, and the Persian, With variegated gutterals and sibilants, the Gaelic with dipthongs and          tripthongs, Choctaw with three different clicks Each letter is somebody But the Crab is nobody Nobody Nobody A ganglion of neurotic imitations Composed of each letter in turn Jointed by conflicts he does not want A word that never existed with a sense nobody can understand. Suffering for the sins his father refuse to commit He sits and thinks about the twiddling toes of Gunerita A boy-girl or girl-boy of an average pulchritude Haunted by phantoms of his female self Whom he has never seen but composed himself, thus:      Breasts of Augustina brains of Beatrice      Arms of Capucine on the motherliness of Dorothea      Eyes of Evelyn in the brow of Francesca      Fragrance of Gretchen with the understanding of Helen This he desires, but despises: Bhah! Always sideways, crabs walk. Either he is not fit for this world Or this world not fit for him. But which? After all this pain of development is there neither interval nor reward? They lured him with promises, Now it has all slipped sideways What is the good, I ask you, of going into a melting-pot If fated to melt again after getting out of it? The answers are: He is not out of it Determined to budge not from yon slippery rock Not a yard, no, not an inch, no, nor a barleycorn's breadth For chance is not blind but unimpedable And we call it blind because Since we frustrate it only by chance We prefer to shut our own eyes. The crab however crawls on. He must therefore be a crab subnormal. One day, one of his foreclaws, assembled as usual by many men, Being longer than the other, turns and pinches his tentacles With the other he pinches the persons that assembled the long one Next day the short one, equally alien, is the longer And the process is reversed. In mass production one hand never knows The evil the other is inspiring it to do This is a heretic even to the faiths he fails to believe So worthless, awkward, unintelligible, The crab crawls on. He has sufferd because he was ugly Let him be cruel now that he is attractive Caring not whether he fructifies cruelty or is merely hard on self. We trap our goldfinch trapping out souls therewinged Sacrifice our mad gods to the madder gods: We hymn the two sons of Leda and Zeus Aegis-bearer We don't. We drink and drivel. My      poor Catullus, do stop being such a      fool. Admit that lost which as you watch is      gone. O, once the days shone very bright for      you, when where that girl you loved so (as no      other will be) called, you came and came. And      then and there were odd things done and many      which you wanted and she didn't not want.      Yes indeed the days shone very bright for      you. But now she doesn't want it.                                                                   Don't you either,       booby. Don't keep chasing her. Don't live in       misery, carry on, be firm, be hardened.       Goodbye, girl: Catullus is quite hardened,       doesn't want you, doesn't ask, if you're not       keen though sorry you'll be to be not asked.       Yes, poor sinner . . . what is left in life for       you? Who'll now go with you? Who'll be attracted?       Whom'll you love now? Whom say you belong to?       Whom'll you now kiss? Whose lips'll you nibble?       Now you, Catullus! you've decided to be hardened.       Now you, Catullus! you've decided to be hardened. How can I be hardened when the whole world is fluid? O Aphrodit  Pand mos, your badgers rolling in the moonlit corn Corn blue-bloom-covered carpeting the wind Wind humming like distant rooks Distant rooks busy like factory whirring metal Whirring metallic starlings bizarre like cogwheels missing teeth These last grinning like the backs of old motor cars Old motor cars smelling of tragomaschality Tragomaschality denoting the triumph of self over civilization Civilization being relative our to Greek                            Greek to Persian                            Persian to Chinese Chinese politely making borborygms to show satisfaction Satisfaction a matter of capacity Capacity not significance: otherwise with an epigram Epigrams poems with a strabismus Strabismus being as common spiritually as optically the moon The moon tramping regular steps like a policeman past the houses of the            Zodiac And the Zodiac itself, whirling and flaming sideways Circling from no point returning through no point Endlessly skidding as long as man skids, though never moving,     Wavers, topples, dissolves like a sandcastle into acidity. Is there nothing more soluble, more gaseous, more imperceptible? Nothing.

n lani clips kaikainali i s tiny fingernails while she sleeps    the rape of oceania began with guam    soldiers invade okinawa, hawai i, the philippines, and south korea   #yesallwomen how do [we] stop kaikainali i s body from becoming target practice   bullets fragmentbullets fragment and ricochet    n lani brushes kaikainali i s hair when she wakes, sings the names of body parts in hawaiian language    who will remember the names of girls disappeared from reservations and maquiladoras from villages and schools #mmiw #mmaw #bringbackourgirls n lani gathers the clippingsbecause evenbecause even [our] nails are ten percent water    outside, m noa rain falls as large as eggs    inside, n lani lies on her side to breast- feed kaikainali i in bed    they fall asleep facing each other, still latched    i nestle with them and, for a moment, kaikainali i smiles    what does she dream about? her deep breath rises and falls like king tides    her fragile rib cage appears and disappears like a coral island crowning   my daughter,my daughter i know our stories are heavier than stones, but you must carry them with you no matter how far from home the storms take your canoe because youwill alwayswill always find shelter in our stories, youstories, you will always belong in our stories, you will always be sacred in our ocean of stories   hanom hanomhanom hanom

Just let the San Andreas stay put, keeping this tunnel intact, enough to amble   out of it, past Louie s DimLouie s DimSum a Saturday afternoon,Sum a breeze detectable off   the bay visible in the distance, carrying with it the smells of open air markets:   crab freshly caught and seahorses piled in bins along Stockton . . .    or Jack, strolling out of the tube connecting Polk Gulch and North Beach, on his way   to Aquatic Park to spread the Sporting Green on his favorite patch of grass . . .   He is ferrying the portable radio to his ear, listening for the count   in the bottom of the ninth at Candlestick, begins to smooth   the pages with the palms before he sits to keep it dry: the split   seat of his pants                  for Jack Spicer (1925-1965)                  for Jack Spicer (1925-1965)

Except another black girl was with me. Mother. Always lonely. I am always. Mother those girls. Forty-two. March summer. Light blue. Vermont. Endless crescent. Invert as a tyke lake. Fernet Mother, I'm grown. Forest. San Francisco. Lone cold. Stone turd. Talk three or none. Kidding. Kidding.

The future is one of place devoid of race. A jawbone under a sock is a geological clock. The plunking of rain on the termite-riddled windowpane: reading a Bible on that ledge is a tiny college. A Gal pagos tortoise is killed (or, simply, unwilled). The Ebola virus weeps, or retires, because, like us, it tires. Meanwhile, below the subbasement, a Suede Revolution: the phlegmatic skill of the cryptographersoixante-huitards the teleprompter.soixante-huitards The id in facsimile is suspended on a leash, twisting in the rain above that goddammed windowpane. Being is slightly corrupted by the Thinking that s one-upped it (like the pun on pain) and will never love again.

My Dear Conflicted Reader,             If you will grant me that most of us have an equivocal nature, and that when we waken we have not made up our minds which direc- tion we're headed; so that you might see a man driving to work in a perfume- and dye-free shirt, and a woman with an overdone tan hold up an orange flag in one hand, a Virginia Slim in the other as if this were their predestination. Grant me that both of them were likely contemplat- ing a different scheme of things. WHERE DO YOU WANT TO SPEND ETERNITY the church marquee demands on the way to my boy's school, SMOKING OR NON-SMOKING. I admit I had not thought of where or which direction in exactly those terms. The radio ministry says g-o-d has a wrong-answer button and we are all waiting for it to go off...                                           Count your grey hairs                                           Count your chigger bites                                           Count your pills                                           Count the times the phone rings                                           Count your T cells                                           Count your mosquito bites                                           Count the days since your last menses                                           Count the chickens you've eaten                                           Count your cankers                                           Count the storm candles                                           Count your stitches                                           Count your broken bones                                           Count the flies you killed before noon  

I.   March 1979 and I am watching Nazis march through Chicago. The bold type of the Sun-Times describes a small bandSun-Times of hoodlums, undereducated boy scouts, the better to be ignored. My grandfather, back hunched over his Bible, agrees. Jews like myself should stay home, should lay down our stones and pray like the Jews that we are.   II.   Grandfather, you are easy to love with your long beard and the way you sway like a palm branch in the storm. It is easy to romanticize your spiritual search, worldly naivet  and wise rabbinical words. You belong in the books I read by Singer, Peretz, Sholom Aleichem. But their characters are ignorant of the chapters to come. You know where their prayers will lead.   III.   A circle. Six Nazis. Your wife in the middle. One soldier says all Jewesses are whoresJewesses  and the others agree. You say nothing. Years later you'll decide to speak: "Do we not serve Hitler's purpose, we who would sooner renounce our beliefs than assume our burdens?"   IV.   A generation after the Holocaust and I know no Hebrew. No Yiddish. No Torah. I fast only on the Day of Atonement and even then I've been known to cheat. A generation after the Holocaust and I apologize for my grandfather's bent back and wild gestures. I used to tremble to the rhythm of his prayers. I feared the mysterious words that kept us from the devil. Now, from my window I watch Nazis march. Their feet strike the pavement like the ticking of a clock. I am a Jew a generation after the Holocaust. Poorer, my grandfather says, without a past than he, who has no future.  

i ii I didn t choose the word    it came pouring out of my throat like the water inside a drowned man. I didn t even push on my stomach. I just lay there, dead (like he told me) &  I  came out. (I m sorry, Father.  I  wasn t my fault.)   ii iiii (How did  I  feel?) Felt almost alive when I d get in, like the Trojan horse. I d sit on the bench (I didn t look out of the eyeholes so I wouldn t see the carnage).   iii iiiiii (Is  I  speaking another language?) I said,  I  is dangerous. But at the time I couldn t tell which one of us was speaking.   iv iviv (Why  I ?)  I  was the closest I could get to the one I loved (who I believe was smothered in her playpen). Perhaps she gave birth to  I  before she died.   v vv I deny  I,  & the closer I get, the more  I  keeps receding.   vi vivi I found  I  in the bulrushes raised by a dirtiness beyond imagination. I loved  I  like a stinky bed. While I hid in a sentence with a bunch of other words.   vii viivii (What is  I ?) A transmission through space? A dismemberment of the spirit? More like opening the chest & throwing the heart out with the gizzards.   viii viiiviii (Translation) Years later  I  came back wanting to be known. Like the unspeakable name of God, I tried my 2 letters, leaving the  O  for breath, like in the Bible, missing.   ix ixix I am not the  I  in my poems.  I  is the net I try to pull me in with.   x xx I try to talk with  I,  but  I  doesn t trust me.  I  says I am slippery by nature.   xi xixi I made  I  do what I wasn t supposed to do, what I didn t want to do    defend me, stand as an example, stand in for what I was hiding. I treated  I  as if  I  wasn t human.   xii xiixii They say that what I write belongs to me, that it is my true experience. They think it validates my endurance. But why pretend?  I  is a kind of terminal survival.   xiii xiiixiii I didn t promise  I  anything & in that way  I  is the one I was most true to.

  Race, friends, is boring.  Everyone says so. Hashtag all lives matter, the channel turns, we ourselves live and turn, and moreover the TV told me yesterday (unendingly)  Ever to talk about race means you have no   Inner Resources.  I conclude now I have no Inner Resources, because all I see is race. People have race, literature has race, especially great literature, Henry has race, with his blacks & whites made up as his feelings   about love & sex & art, which have race. And our social ills, & sin, in Chinese drag are somehow a dog that s eaten itself, & its tail miserably remains as our mirror, bone or breaker, heaving on tide: us, flag.  

I envied the dog lying in the yard so I did it. But there was a pebble under my flank so I got up and looked for the pebble, brushed it away and lay back down. My dog thus far overlooked the pebble. I guess it's her thick Lab fur. With my head downhill the blood gorged me with ideas. Not good. Got up. Turned around. Now I see hundreds of infinitesimal ants. I'm on an ant home. I get up and move five feet. The dog hasn't moved from her serene place. Now I'm rather too near a thicket where I saw a big black snake last week that might decide to join me. I moved near the actual dog this time but she got up and went under the porch. She doesn't like it when I'm acting weird. I'm failing as a dog when my own kind rejects me, but doing better than when I envied birds, the creature the least like us, therefore utterly enviable. To be sure I cheeped a lot but didn't try to fly. We humans can take off but are no good at landing.

   

     They said I got away in a boat And humbled me at the inquiry. I tell you      I sank as far that night as any Hero. As I sat shivering on the dark water      I turned to ice to hear my costly Life go thundering down in a pandemonium of      Prams, pianos, sideboards, winches, Boilers bursting and shredded ragtime. Now I hide      In a lonely house behind the sea Where the tide leaves broken toys and hatboxes      Silently at my door. The showers of April, flowers of May mean nothing to me, nor the      Late light of June, when my gardener Describes to strangers how the old man stays in bed      On seaward mornings after nights of Wind, takes his cocaine and will see no one. Then it is      I drown again with all those dim Lost faces I never understood, my poor soul      Screams out in the starlight, heart Breaks loose and rolls down like a stone.      Include me in your lamentations.  

           1 The sky is alone tonight   the moon and stars seek some presence in the firm quiet, in the hard lack. A meteor falls in the empty dark. Someone is absent, the universe is bare listen, God, are you there? Sand silts the world   dockleaves in the yard, broken teeth eat sadness in the hayless barn. Silence knocks on men's doors and silence answers it   but music is heard in space. Lichen eats the stone, old arrogance eats peace: female salt eats being, angry rust eats blood. Beetle and seal are dead, poisoned children in lakes   but music is heard in space. Weak whistle-music moves beyond Orion's Belt, silk threads in a cave float in the dark. Some player in the solitude with a hopeful song but destruction still goes on. Lard made from whales, coats from the seals' fur   shaving brush from badger hair, burnt chicks are henfood. God's lovely creatures last though we eat them, trout and lamb   there's a use for the whistler's tune. I saw a nest ablaze, living wood sawdust. I saw a bird on fire fall soundless from the air. I saw the ancient ramparts downed and silence in the plover field. I saw the killer's belly feed. A tongue hangs on a tree, the magpies' might is right: a noise of glossy black and white. I heard their loud artillery. My ears are withered leaves from their cacophony, the discord shuts God's eyes. But a new musician plays and music's heard in space.            2 Listen, father, wait a while   stay alive with me until the universe's gown, once as fresh as cabbage-heart, is clean again. Do you remember mothers' milk like pigeons' milk that feeds the flock? It will pour again   wait on. I saw it last night in the northern sky whiter than any blood dripped from the moon's pap and every parched grave opened up and the dough of milk and earth made a bread forever fresh. Listen, father, listen close   though the sky's a tambourine danced on by an iron fool there's harmony beyond his noise. Take time and slow your pace   the dark drink waits for you and strange music out in space. Did you see them last night, night's-eyes brilliant bright in the black grass and dandelions en masse,en masse, guineas on velvet once on an old god's shoulders dead since the ancient magic passed? Remember the age of the seed, kingdom of creatures, power of air? (Man was not alone, man and his household.) Waterfall tumbling from eldertree, foam on pools like feather capes? Remember pollen from grasses' ears? Listen, father, cry no tear for evil seed, for history's d bris, for the cold eternal stones, ruined towers, groves of graves. Listen: a bullfinch sings sweetly (musical anvil in forge)his harmony's all history.his  So, my father, wait a while. There's no music after dying, no inkling of a human sigh   just worlds falling into suns. Earth will be the brightest bride, star-necklets on her gown   tinwhistles cracking tunes, platform dances in each town. Easy, father, wait a while. But he did not wait.           3   One day when hope was ill I took dangerous medicine and hope died out and left me there, a naked surgeon, my patient dead. Like a hen at grips with death my bill dumb down a well, my plumage drowned in hate. I turned my back on Glendarock, walked for a drink to ease and to obliterate pain and fear and grief. Rats laughed from every hedge, bones embossed the road   in the wind a grey crow screeched. And then I saw the sign that led my heart to peace   barley like a green fire, sheets of barley in live waves quivering its thousand ears, swaying flames of green as quietly restless as a child asleep. I knew then no victory would go to iron axe or spear: our mother which art on earth conserve us safe and clean. Gale and 'quake knock flat all laws, all walls, all treasuries   bindweed chokes the telegraph.   In spite of joy this peace waned and ice ran through every vein: all my pores were locked and my heart turned, a piglet on a spit, his blood steam, panting like a dog's tongue; the scythe taught the corn its dream. Caterpillars squashed on the roads, the swallow snapping back flies, frogspawn dead in pools dried up, the horsefly craving blood. Prick in a vice, a man screams. The scythe taught the poet his dream. Barley, cover me up, let me lie in your field. I ask of you a green death in the quiet milk of your stalks. Yes, the world will survive with neither you nor me alive. Damn you, death, I will not then experience the new gown of the universe   just lie manure on immaculate earth.            4 Once a perfect standing stone, fame engraved on my side, my statement unambiguous, I had nothing to hide. But the wind of curiosity blew with its what? and how? and why?what? how? why? and blunted the edge of my dignity. The cow of love rubbed its flank against my sides and frost burnt: the grain inside me shrank, I flaked on the grass bank. A flock of questions came seeking food and the mother in me said 'chook, chook' though I was dumb and mere rock. The anxiety mason chipped at me with his heavy hammer, carving his own design: his chisel gouged my grammar, engraved no notices of mine and every passing stray has read words not engendered in my head. And the lichen letters came twisting the bare word and their grey crust grew on me and concealed my shape. I lost all courage and desire, my voice was just a shard and all the silent world had ears. My body like a dead elm   dumb lightning upside-down   inquisitor's file eroding me, wedges wearing me out. Before me, in my mouth, restraints and oaths   but my poem stayed, I still stand. But where are they? The sky stands on my tip, stars flow through me, inside: I tame the sun and moon, harnessed to my pride. No friendships flourish in my shade, no herb of love, no mint of help, and I'm incapable of prayer. Now merely a lump of stone smashed in the field of scythes, a circle of calves around me staring with silly eyes. .  I lonesome like a hawtree while lichen hones me down and a lizard-brooch sleeps.             5 In Hammer Glen there's blood in milk and a goose complains on an empty hearth: a cat swells in the churn, dead and full. A flitch of bacon hangs itself from rafters: a tongs stands like a bull. My first trip to the house of thatch   home of the Slaughter Lad who condemned his own kind   a hammer-vision showed him how to escape the bird-lime. I was called, no scalpel packed. I threw a saddle on the dark and galloped to the threshold of his mind. Knots of briars slid from their nests, each poisoned eye a blackberry. I was pelted with a shower of fruit from a bare blackthorn tree. I heard the chick sing in the egg, and the straw in the mattress grew, the raspberry cried in the jam. But I came safe from these shades, out of the battle-noise gales, until I reached Slaughter Lad's and saw there under the moon's eye a hedgehog milking a jack snipe, a goat beating a drum in the sky   I had crossed over the borders of the live. I walked into his head   no knife, no healing herb   helix of a snail's shell, into a complex corridor. Prayers of hate, echoes of roars fell from the faceted walls   his father's face was carved on the floor. 'I hit him hit him hit him again   the goose drank the juice of this brain, I made a pig-trough from his skull and put his eyes under a hen. One did not hatch at all, the other shook and cracked. Out walked a chicken's claw. 'The claw still sticks in me   it tortures and exhausts: contrition runs from my nose, surgeon, give me peace.' I refused. And left the place. I threw away all style and craft, my heart was ash and chaff, my soul was a gravel bed   a naked surgeon, and my patient dead.          6 The one-eyed monk sits, half prays where millstones turn. His body comes to life, a need to travel grinds him up   a need for pools full of hope, a need for wells of honey and sweat, a need for hills where torches burn. He walks the white-flowered field looking for a ferny place clad in sparse purple light (a foxglove round a bee) to a mild meadow of sheep, to soft dark, root of history   peace to all who walk this way. But only silence from his bell, dead butterfly his manuscript   unfinished, unrevised   he is addicted to this trip, this drug called pilgrimage that kills all dignity and skill and still's his reason to exist. And when the monk grows weak, clumsy, worn, aged   no more desire to roam, wanting his bell and page. But he can no longer illuminate, has lost the power to pray, lost his interest in the everyday. This travel's an enormous act, a trip all have to take, and meadows and mountains lure all who want to escape with coaxing honey, coaxing kiss, 'Do not search for new things, do not search for new things'. I will drown all my books in that honeyed well and play like a foal in the brownest fern. I will swim in the pool of hope, I will walk till night in the bright fields. But in the splendid dark I'll hear wings of parchment shake and bells weep.

Dying, Dad wanted sunscreen. Nonstop. Frantic if withheld. Would sayscreen, and we just did it. Knew he was dying. Was angry.screen In last weeks wore red sleepmask over eyes day and night. Would ride it up onto his forehead for brief intervals, then down, pulled by hand that still worked. A bit. Sometimes shaking too much so just cried eyes. Cried now now. Once cried out light   more like a hiss   waseyesnow nowlight there for that. Yanked it quick. Needed it so badly, the bandage, the world is a short place, wanted the illustration of it gone, wanted to not see out, wanted no out. But I am guessing. The vineyards down the slope,out each latent bud beginning to plump. In the distance, mountains. Beyond sea. All of it distraction, but from what. A waste of what. The red sleepmask. I should have burned it with the rest but kept it. The pane made trees look painted on. Silky. Not good silky. In the next valley once, hammering. Thought it human at first. The woodpeckers went on for days. A carnival of searching for void. How full void is. Small tufts of grass growing so that I can keep track. Taking root is not an easy way toTaking root is not an easy way to go about finding a place to stay. Maybe nothing would happen after all. The hollowing-out now added to by crickets. Spiders making roads in sky. I watch. Look at, then through. What is the emptyatthrough part? Where. Can find nothing that is empty. Seems I should, and soon, aswhere would he go, or what would the indented place on the bed wherewhere would he go he had been be. Be full of. He was a settler in that flesh, that I could see.befull of Not far from breaking camp. Wrapping up the organs in their separate parts   skin rolled away, eyes rolled elsewhere, the fingers tossed aside   ash, ash   the whole like a dime toss, whom do I love, what part, what s in the whom, what s in the late, is there actually a too late   whomlatetoo late because if there is I do not grasp it. Mask he calls, unable to get intoMask wheelchair any longer, stares for bit of time into the air out front, past feet, out the glass door, to the olive tree and fig. Is there fire in the distance. Squints once back up the ray of light, up, back its long road. How far. Mask now. The cremation-decision driving its roots through usMask now all   roots spreading wildly beyond the shadows of the head.  Neighbors  will continue to feed stump, book says, long after it is cut, will send it sugars, phosphorous, nitrogen, all the surrounding trees will try, via fungi, root hairs, send carbon, send enzymes, whole forest hears stress signals, will mourn, like the elephant    I ve wrapped stumps in black plastic when they ve refused to die  says Leila, location Wellington, posted 4 years ago on permagardening. But then guard down. Eyes gone.permagardening A red cotton mask. An old TWA one. Elastic gone. Cries out if it slips off. Wants blue blanket. Says blue. Angry. Who was not angry. Nothingblue enough. Wants to see all daily tests. Read the bloodwork. Wants trans- fusions which we withhold. Would open him to infection. Would buy no time. I m wearing the sleepmask now. I m trying it on. Rubberband soft with age. Adding more age. American red. Red full of noise, of artificial time. Feels like my face is painted on. A spirit. Upturned, ancient, without expression. An old stream flows alongside. Glimmering tongues promise the vanishing will be swift. It s a lie. The periphery disappears but I can still feel it, our knowing what s coming a thicket we got lost in   till theknowing what s coming only thing is now   mask my spirit screams   mask now   vacancynow   mask not coming fast enough   before we have to traverse the riddling disappearances   extinction says the mask   go away now I do not wantextinction to see you any longer   beauty you are too near   too near   I hear a blackbird and the shoo of air where it lifts off   why won t you just go, you circling winds leaves birds systems directions visibles invisibles honeysuckle limbs and rose gaining self-song, motion, entering this continuum   oh continuum do not lie to me with this delicate weight of time, this floating of as ifs and further-ons and all your guides toas ifsfurther-ons dreaming, abundance, the coming true of the true. No. From under here, listening hard, light feels around me almost visible, doused with benzene, and time goes away, and my eyes feel on them the small weight, the minuscule no to things, which I can conjure, which I think I know byno heart, but no, I do not, I need the mask. And it feels like an idea. We are in a cave now. It is a hundred million years ago. They will bring the meds again now and the urine pot   he yells for it   but for now under the mask it is a lowly spot, you can make dawn come you can feel us inherit the earth, the jay shifts in the tree and you caninherit the earth hear it. There is little. You hear the little. Hear the head snapped on the stem. Hear the angel trapped in the stone. Hear pure chance which sounds like a boy marching alongside an army wanting to enlist. The year is 1490, 380, 1774, 10 BCE. You hear the outline in the tree   why    because it touches the other outlines. If I try to raise the mask the hand he can barely use flutters angry bird wing at me. Would hit me with finger wings but too broken. Maybe in Lee s army, maybe in Grant s. It made no difference in the end. Maybe in Caesar s maybe in Christ s. The trillions seem more clear than ever in the day behind the mask. The dark gray of the fever feels every inch of the bark. Freckled, the pure proclamations being made by the light. It is not day it is saying, bright as quicklime, text of flames he can hear   no, not day   day sprawls under to let us flow through over its parched back. Lies flat. Lie flat day he thinks under the red mask. Spread yourself over us light, the dead at Antietam yes his people, both sides, the cufflinks in the drawer he will not see again   they were Lee s he would say   they were Grant s   I saw the will of the Davis side   I did   he says, smell of gravel coming from the path, day sitting now over us like a lioness. It is neither dark nor light. As if you are the place where the branch was sawed off   that place on the oak   and air silently touched your new raw end. You put it on, you pull it down, and then effort, enlistment, singing, and you are given a fine practitioner s absence, you are a purpose surrounded by chance, a hole in chance. You can feel the clouds move over the sun from here. You can hear the sun return and insect-hum spray up. You can lie still and feel this is the ultimate price. You feel it getting paid. By you. It is you.

An enormous list: coming and goings, nights and mornings, births and deaths and rebirths and second deaths and little lapses like grace notes where sadness surges in:   sadness surges in, a passing-windshield light-effect on the ceiling. Would you prefer it some other way? I m versatile. I m hungry. I m hot. I m not really sad either. I m happy, it s just that this happiness isn t the happiness I expected or sought and for a time I confused this happiness with the sadness I thought I was experiencing. I feel a lot better now.   Oooh. That should give you an indication of the improvement. Oooh, there it goes again. And again, only I didn t say  Oooh  this time. I can t explain it, but it feels terrific, like a totally fulfilled infatuation or a California Lifestyle apartment ad.

When I am a toddler, a child, a tween, a teen, and a young adult, I am called an ancestral soul, a ti gran moun, a little old person.
 
Adults study me and decide that I am wise beyond my years, mature for my age, emotionally ripe. I am told it is unusual to meet a five-ten-fifteen-year-old girl who does not slouch or mumble or speak in monosyllables.
 
When I do the things that come naturally to me when I hold my spine up erect, when I wait my turn to speak, when I speak having listened, carefully, when I enunciate, when I look grown-ups in the eye I am told I must have  been here before. 
 
"How do you know?" one college professor asks me after she has seen a psychologically violent play I have written at age nineteen. "How do you already know? 
 
In high school, I charm my teachers. They encourage me to write speeches about feminism that I recite for International Women's Day at City Hall or deliver as part of conference panels at local universities.  If you were older," they tell me, "we would probably be friends.  One of them even flirts with me.
 
Among my peers I exist somewhere between amicably mysterious and irrevocably dorky. The popular kids greet me in the hallways, but they never invite me to their beer-drenched parties. I will never play Spin the Bottle. I will never play Seven Minutes in Heaven. My mother tells me she is protecting me from boys, but the truth is, after I do my homework, she wants me to type up another family friend s r sum  or resignation letter. At home, I am a bridge, a cultural interpreter, a spokesperson, a trusted ally, an American who is Haitian too, but also definitely American.
 
The children of immigrants don't get to be children. We lose our innocence watching our parents' backs bend, break. I am an old soul because when I am young, I watch my parents' spirits get slaughtered.
 
In Haiti, they were middle class. Hopeful teachers. Home owners. They were black like their live-in servants. They donated clothes to the poor. They gave up everything they knew to inherit American dreams. And here, they join factory lines, wipe shit from mean old white men's behinds, scrub five-star hotel toilets for dimes above minimum wage. Here, they shuck and jive and step and fetch and play chauffeur to people who aren't as smart as they are, people who do not speak as many languages as they do. In the 1980s, they are barred from giving blood because newscasters and politicians say that AIDS comes from where they come from: Haiti, the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, a black magic island that spawns boat people and chaos, a place of illiterate zombies, orphan beggars and brazen political corruption.
 
When I am a child, my childhood is a luxury my family cannot afford. Their dignity is not spared, so my innocence is not spared. They are humihated and traumatized daily, so I become a nurse to their trauma. I am told too much, so I know too much, so I am wise beyond my years.
 
When I am six, my mother tells me she found out she was pregnant with me at age nineteen, she  tried to kill the baby." She says "the baby," as if it isn t me she s talking about; as if I am not the expensive, scandalous daughter who forced my way into her world despite the abortion-inducing herbal teas she drank and her frantic leaps off of small buildings.
 
When I am sixteen, my father calls me on the phone to, inevitably, weep. He says, "Living in this country, I have learned not to hope for things. Only you are my hope. Only you."
So yes, I grow up fast.
 

Father gave her a little extra. How could she not             fall for him? He was handsome   but still a boy. In the depot where soldiers             took such women, his skinny body clung   too close to hers and his narrow ass still             belonged to his mother. The other men   knew the routine and how much to pay.             She loathed their accent and American swagger.   The sweat would barely cool and dry             before another shook the cot and bucked his hips   out of rhythm in some other time zone.               However, he began to offer other things   besides money. He brought sweets from the base             and the minute he touched his pocket   the face she reserved for his English crumbled             like sweet toffee. Because he didn't know how   to say what he wanted to say, no time             was spent on uneasiness. Chocolate,   caramel and peanuts spoke best, secured             his place. He hooked his arms through hers as if   they could stroll the lane like an ordinary couple:             the unassuming black and the Korean whore   in the middle of the Vietnam War.  

I once carried my mollusk tune All the way to the lottery of gods. Rain was the old funeral choir That keened of a hemisphere Moored under lampwings. Clouds never left. I knew The lights would shine clearer If I closed my eyes, just as I knew the Pacific would teach Me to sleep before tying my Name to the flaming. Here I Am now at the end of amethyst, Drizzling another lost sunrise Inside the quilt of your hand.

Even now there are places where a thought might grow   Peruvian mines, worked out and abandoned To a slow clock of condensation, An echo trapped for ever, and a flutter Of wildflowers in the lift-shaft, Indian compounds where the wind dances And a door bangs with diminished confidence, Lime crevices behind rippling rain barrels, Dog corners for bone burials; And in a disused shed in Co. Wexford,   Deep in the grounds of a burnt-out hotel, Among the bathtubs and the washbasins A thousand mushrooms crowd to a keyhole. This is the one star in their firmament Or frames a star within a star. What should they do there but desire? So many days beyond the rhododendrons With the world waltzing in its bowl of cloud, They have learnt patience and silence Listening to the rooks querulous in the high wood.   They have been waiting for us in a foetor Of vegetable sweat since civil war days, Since the gravel-crunching, interminable departure Of the expropriated mycologist. He never came back, and light since then Is a keyhole rusting gently after rain. Spiders have spun, flies dusted to mildew And once a day, perhaps, they have heard something   A trickle of masonry, a shout from the blue Or a lorry changing gear at the end of the lane.   There have been deaths, the pale flesh flaking Into the earth that nourished it; And nightmares, born of these and the grim Dominion of stale air and rank moisture. Those nearest the door grow strong    Elbow room! Elbow room!  The rest, dim in a twilight of crumbling Utensils and broken pitchers, groaning For their deliverance, have been so long Expectant that there is left only the posture.   A half century, without visitors, in the dark   Poor preparation for the cracking lock And creak of hinges; magi, moonmen, Powdery prisoners of the old regime, Web-throated, stalked like triffids, racked by drought And insomnia, only the ghost of a scream At the flash-bulb firing-squad we wake them with Shows there is life yet in their feverish forms. Grown beyond nature now, soft food for worms, They lift frail heads in gravity and good faith.   They are begging us, you see, in their wordless way, To do something, to speak on their behalf Or at least not to close the door again. Lost people of Treblinka and Pompeii!  Save us, save us,  they seem to say,  Let the god not abandon us Who have come so far in darkness and in pain. We too had our lives to live. You with your light meter and relaxed itinerary, Let not our naive labours have been in vain!     

Myself I'm like a dress my mother made me, a fabric self split open with a sigh as I grew and bewildered or proud   or full of rage patched with nicer material than we'd had before. I got the sense it was all wasted on me.   But a needle's sharp to pierce, is itself pierced so as to sew like I was taught. Like I learned: no dress could ever be   beautiful or best if it had me in it. I was the stain in a place we couldn't fix. Having fallen on a slicer of some kind.   Double-seamed, scabbed over, a new body pocket in the pattern. How to stitch up that wound right into the clean vertical rip   in some on-sale flannelette? I'd never again be cold. Skin's holey not holy. In mad winter alone with drink, I think:   tattoo needles don't use thread but ink to mark a place in this ever-moving skin and that wound is ornament. But who   needs a mark to know what's marked? I would pray to the dark in the dark. But what did I ask for, what did I know   to ask for? Nonfatal wounds: they're there when we die, deliquescent, vibrating like a drum skin just after each beat moves off.   A part of music. A way a body keeps time, is time's keeper, vigilant till time up and goes to find another body. Another's warmth   and shelter. Or related injuries. Anyone who hurts another was hurt that same way, so how far back behind our backs do we go   to finally find the first hurt; whose finger points to say, "You! You're the one who god knows why started a cycle of unending pain,"   to someone's child in short pants? A baby just torn a hole in her amnion swirl? And what of me? I can't tell where my flesh   meets the rest of me, ragbag full of rags, shot full of holes but that's just the way cotton and silk and everything I said up till now looks   when it hits the air and is cried on. I'm so inside out I evaporated entirely already as August does, my actual dress shredded at the seams    unsalvageable. Who would ever love me like this? And just like that, I stopped thinking about it. I agree to meet you at the ferry heading to a place   neither of us wants to go but both just saidsure, I'll go... if you want! We should turn back,sure, I'll go.if you want!  nobody said. Oh we should before it's too late,   nobody said again, insistent this time.

      NO was a violin, NOT a viola, and NEVER a cello. They were noble instruments, but highly nonconformist. Prickly in personality, if sexy. Wayward. Always went in their own direction. Made odd choices. Loved the difficult. Naysayed the popular. Collectively unified in a single reaction to the mainstream: negative.
      When they first chanced to come together, they doubted they would ever meld.
      But the minute they began to make music, they discovered a numinous core to their triangle. They couldn t see this core, smell it, or touch it and neither could their slender audience (thirty people on folding chairs in a church). But all felt it was a natural union of sound, nimble and sublime.
     That night they became the Negativo Trio.
     Retiring to nestle in the velvet warmth of their cases, they whispered to each other, debriefing and musing in the first of many nightly pajama parties. This very first evening they discovered that what they wanted above all were two things. One was to play their music with the very nacre of its nature, and the other was fame.
     Night after night they played. Increased their bookings. Recorded. And were downloaded. They raised money to pay off the debt of their obscure choices. On stage they each shone with the patina of centuries: maple, spruce, and willow with an elegant varnish of gum arabic, honey, and the whites of eggs.
     But they weren t famous, even though they played a nocturne as if every note were a black pearl.
     Yet NO, NOT and NEVER did everything everyone advised them to be famous: they networked, they nodded nicely to publicists, they flashed their Negativo news on social media. But the fact was, the trio wasn t for everybody.
      Do you think it s our name?  NOT the Viola asked.  Would we be more famous as the Nightingale Trio? 
      Nope,  said NEVER the Cello.  Negativo has our brio.  And NEVER was right. The three of them played with nerve. The knottier the piece, the better. They made their audiences reach.
      We should be sexier,  NO the Violin said.  Naughtier. It s our propensity for the minor key; we should lighten it up.  But when they played in the minor key, their audiences felt they had arrived at the navel of the universe. The instruments could never give up the minor.
     Would the Negativos ever learn what the people in the seats knew? The trio wasn t famous because, well, they kind of unnerved people. You had to have nettle to take them on.
     Though they certainly wouldn t have said no to notoriety, eventually they had to admit that they could not surrender their quirks.
      We will never be famous,  NEVER said one night after they had nestled in their cases for their midnight debriefing.
      I m nauseous,  said NO extravagantly.
      And neglected,  said NOT excessively.
      Never,  said NEVER decisively.
     They would never fill the biggest halls. Or be the first name on the tips of tongues. And with the inverted logic of misplaced dreams, even though they had toured, had notched up review, and had triumphs and fans, and websites and bloggers, and a body of criticism devoted to them, they felt they had reached their nadir.
     The next morning they couldn t seem to get up. They lay immobile, as if their velvet-lined cases were coffins.
      A netherworldly silence descended.
      The dust of despair drifted through the crack between the case tops and bottoms onto these living dead.
     Time dragged like a dirty hem.
     Naught into Nil.
     Desolation into Dormancy.
     Dormancy into . . .
                                 . . . Rest.
     Rest into Snoozing.
     Snoozing into Sleep.
     Sleep into Healing.
     The nostrum of sleep lasted until the pinkish light that heralds spring.
     A noisy nuthatch drilled for insects in a nearby tree. It was a forest sound, yodel-y and ebullient. It awoke the maple and spruce and willow of the Negativo s constitutions. Their bodies couldn t help responding to the vernal signal given when spring utters its only word: Nevertheless. 
     If not fame, nevertheless music.
      Numbskull nuthatch!  NEVER growled.
      Ninny nuthatch,  NO yawned.
      Bumptious bird,  NOT shifted, inadvertently jostling the snap to the dusty case. It sprang open. NO unclicked and climbed out, too. And NEVER heaved the lid.
      They played immediately of course, trying a violin piece by the underrated Nardini. Most thought him a lightweight, but the Negativos gave it their signature interpretation of naked necessity.
      Oh it was NOTHING,  they began to say to one another as they did musical favors for themselves, producing scores of synchronicities and the occasional juicy nihilistic dissonance. They buoyed on their notes, as if a midnight Pacific of calm, rich, dark negatives were effused with luminescence.
      How relieved their listeners were to have them back. Again their audiences were made aware of the noses between their ears. That slight, brief piquancy in the nostrils was the smell of earthly harmony. It came from within the airy column that united the instruments, the nucleus of their refusal to suit. Such accord, though it is as rare as ease, seems like nothing.
     And so the Negativo Trio was known as a trio s trio.
     Not famous, but known.
     Contrary to the vicissitudes of fame, ease is the path of the known, smooth as the satin of the instruments  finish. To be recognized, yet not to suffer the disadvantages of fame, is a state so ideal it is the pinnacle of a career. NO, NOT and NEVER had at last woken up to that.
 be brio.Nevertheless. 

     Dancing Queen, 2012 Dancing Queen, 2012Dancing Queen

i want to talk about haiti. how the earth had to break the island s spine to wake the world up to her screaming.   how this post-earthquake crisis is not natural or supernatural. i want to talk about disasters.   how men make them with embargoes, exploitation, stigma, sabotage, scalding debt and cold shoulders.   talk centuries of political corruption so commonplace it's lukewarm, tap.   talk january 1, 1804 and how it shed life. talk 1937 and how it bled death.   talk 1964.  1986.  1991.  2004.  2008. how history is the word that makes today uneven, possible.   talk new orleans, palestine, sri lanka, the bronx and other points or connection.   talk resilience and miracles. how haitian elders sing in time to their grumbling bellies and stubborn hearts.   how after weeks under the rubble, a baby is pulled out, awake, dehydrated, adorable, telling stories with old-soul eyes.   how many more are still buried, breathing, praying and waiting? intact despite the veil of fear and dust coating their bruised faces?   i want to talk about our irreversible dead. the artists, the activists, the spiritual leaders, the family members, the friends, the merchants the outcasts, the cons.   all of them, my newest ancestors, all of them, hovering now, watching our collective response, keeping score, making bets.   i want to talk about money. how one man's recession might be another man's unachievable reality. how unfair that is.   how i see a haitian woman s face every time i look down at a hot meal, slip into my bed, take a sip of water, show mercy to a mirror.   how if my parents had made different decisions three decades ago, it could have been my arm sticking out of a mass grave   i want to talk about gratitude. i want to talk about compassion. i want to talk about respect. how even the desperate deserve it.   how haitians sometimes greet each other with the two words  honor  and  respect.  how we all should follow suit.   try every time you hear the word  victim,  you think  honor.  try every time you hear the tag  john doe,  you shout  respect!    because my people have names. because my people have nerve. because my people are your people in disguise   i want to talk about haiti. i always talk about haiti. my mouth quaking with her love, complexity, honor and respect.   come sit, come stand, come cry with me. talk. there s much to say. walk. much more to do.

Gay little Girl-of-the-Diving-Tank, I desire a name for you, Nice, as a right glove fits; For you who amid the malodorous Mechanics of this unlovely thing, Are darling of spirit and form. I know you a glance, and what you are Sits-by-the-fire in my heart. My Limousine-Lady knows you, or Why does the slant-envy of her eye mark Your straight air and radiant inclusive smile? Guilt pins a fig-leaf; Innocence is its own adorning. The bull-necked man knows you this first time His itching flesh sees form divine and vibrant health And thinks not of his avocation. I came incuriously  Set on no diversion save that my mind Might safely nurse its brood of misdeeds In the presence of a blind crowd. The color of life was gray. Everywhere the setting seemed right For my mood. Here the sausage and garlic booth Sent unholy incense skyward; There a quivering female-thing Gestured assignations, and lied To call it dancing; There, too, were games of chance With chances for none; But oh! Girl-of-the-Tank, at last! Gleaming Girl, how intimately pure and free The gaze you send the crowd, As though you know the dearth of beauty In its sordid life. We need you my Limousine-Lady, The bull-necked man and I. Seeing you here brave and water-clean, Leaven for the heavy ones of earth, I am swift to feel that what makes The plodder glad is good; and Whatever is good is God. The wonder is that you are here; I have seen the queer in queer places, But never before a heaven-fed Naiad of the Carnival-Tank! Little Diver, Destiny for you, Like as for me, is shod in silence; Years may seep into your soul The bacilli of the usual and the expedient; I implore Neptune to claim his child to-day!

The gods do not interest him, nor their debris, nor their terrible storms: he already knows how a body is made to glow, precursor to neon lights    how hunger is hereditary. Sons should not be haunted except by the dead, and his father is sober now, accepts tribute in silence and Coca-Cola. He is thankful for strong knees, for momentum that lives in the mouth and the hands. Here is the fish with the filigree scales, here is the pot of rice   here, here: the grain of rice that makes the bowl a bowl. Tuna s blood hardening in the water. Here is the night through which he runs, realizing the floor has turned to tissue paper, tearing into morning. No, the gods do not compel him: he cannot bear the sight of the sun, an open sore    prefers the colors of its setting, how they reflect the ocean s currents, always giving rise to something new or something he has forgotten. The sky as a table, mounds of rice glazed with soy, gleaming like a display of mackerel, like snow general upon the island s winter spine. Days parade in their uniform; hearts attack, close markets, open new ones. He teaches his sons to gut fish, does not despair his own hands  speed: salt bandaging a cut, memory fraying at the edges. Reaching, always    the top of the ladder, buried in light   

ke pwoahn Pohnpeike pwoahn Pohnpei I told him as we kissedis that a good thing?is that a good thing? he askedhell yeahell yea I wanted to say replaced it with another kiss inhaling the mix of last night s sakau en Pohnpei  seir en wai, sweat rain intoxicating taking me home he left that smell behind it would barely linger by the time he reached his destination I was headed for it so the smell stayed bittersweet and blue on my skin, in my hair I carried it with me there where it grew mixed with mangoes, coughs, handshakes, pigs, babies, and old people I m back it now reeks won t wash away with the other smells get in my car it hits me pungent remnants of the mwaramwar he left behind.

 my father said, again and again, shaking his head in disbelief at any ostentation; the neighbor's gold- plated knocker (we still banged fists) or my own lust to own the autographed edition or the waxed bronze bust. It is not only the idea which should hold all of the pleasure  but the poet's pencil marks on paper which we treasure above the memorized poem. And so I fan my flushed face, signaling the fast-talking auctioneer, who has traced the provenance, and picks up the pace, multiplying offers. And who now does my father's bidding? Heaven's coffers, perhaps, are for the destitute; but why did he have to die to escape the shitty, crime-ridden, never-t0-be-gentrified neighborhood of both our births? The cost of living, he would argue, is not the worth of being alive. But still he checked each lottery ticket which littered the empty lot next door, praised their silver latex glitter, praying to the beautiful unscratched, like little gods. Money talks, he taught me. But nobody beats the odds.  

it isn't matter isn't doesn't matter does it compared with what shan't have known your lines are all lines of approach this dog's eyelids this delhi dog's intentional eyelids, this doorway dog, this dog fellating beggars delhi exuding matter nictitation cannot extrude America to england the third nictitating poetry is over eyelid cannot eject America to england large foreign bodies poetry is over over and out surgery rarely happens over and ours dogs aren't loved over here, here! sufficiently foreign bodies remain requiring incision mind yourself it happened before you as you go you're nothing cold sunshine practised apprehension

In all this system I watched a cloud fall Carted wet down the design Need is a big pool Lo go its creaturely waves Commerce came open and bright like a starfuck "I hear, with great shame for our century" Last zing on the stairs "So-and-so wants company to Paris; so-and-so is looking for a           servant with such-and-such qualifications" Execution too diddled back then "So-and-so wants a master"

A migraine's aura swallows an eye from a face into gapless, absent folds of unseeing. His scars concealed, the three-legged cat limps fluidly along a soft shore redrawn by storms.

is a fairy-tale queendom   with monsters whom I don t know     I only know my friends the fairies       of Alaska, the Yupik, I mean         fairies and white mountains           that disappear into the sky             bonfire at Drew s when               Jerrod said, Dan is                 lovely, except when                   he bitch-slapped                     me, which I                       didn t, so I said,                         With my cock!                           and he said,                             Well, it s good                               it s small, so                                 I said, Then                                   it was pure                                     pleasure,                                       yes                                         .                                           .                                             .                                               ?

I was a traveler in my day a business traveler, territorial in the grassy gaps. I sold bonds to clients hungry for bonds in the boundless sales call door to door among  folks.  It was a job I was born with. I had a heavy sample bag, rubber- banded stack of calling cards and leather binder (embossed) opening upon a vista of lamination, obligation rumination.   I furnished a nation to the chemical engineers and wives of Schenectady, New York over coffee, over roast beef and piano, a kingdom, a nation, a principality, landlocked state, aspirational acreage spiritual fallout hideout. I showed a picture of my boy cross-legged in front of a backdrop of a glaciated hanging valley deep in the transaction among handshakes and signatures if it came to it This is my boy, I said Come to me.   I was a traveler. Later I inspected the nickel mines near Sudbury telling my boy about the endless sheer black subterranean drop in the cage. I was telling the truth when I knew how to, as I had to as sales required, as stewardship permitted, long before disembodiment. I kept a picture of my boy in front of a cardboard tree and treehouse platform tacked to the upholstered partition above my desk. Once I brought him to the office. He stared at himself.  I had a treehouse then,  he said.

Unlike the ashes that make their home with hot coals, snails prefer moist earth. Go on: they advance while gluing themselves to it with their entire bodies. They carry it, they eat it, they shit it. They go through it, it goes through them. It s the best kind of interpenetration, as between tones, one passive and one active. The passive bathes and nourishes the active, which overturns the other while it eats.
(There is more to be said about snails. First of all their immaculate clamminess. Their sangfroid. Their stretchiness.)
One can scarcely conceive of a snail outside its shell and unmoving. The moment it rests it sinks down deep into itself. In fact, its modesty obliges it to move as soon as it has shown its nakedness and  revealed its vulnerable shape. The moment it s exposed, it moves on.
During periods of dryness they withdraw into ditches where it seems their bodies are enough to maintain their dampness. No doubt their neighbors there are toads and frogs and other ectothermic animals. But when they come out again they don t move as quickly. You have to admire their willingness to go into the ditch, given how hard it is for them to come out again.
Note also that though snails like moist soil, they have no affection for places that are too wet such as marshes or ponds. Most assuredly they prefer firm earth, as long as it s fertile and damp.
They are fond as well of moisture-rich vegetables and green leafy plants. They know how to feed on them leaving only the veins, cutting free the most tender leaves. They are hell on salads.
What are these beings from the depths of the ditches? Though snails love many of their trenches  qualities they have every intention of leaving. They are in their element but they are also wanderers. And when they emerge into the daylight onto firm ground their shells will preserve their vagabond s hauteur.
It must be a pain to have to haul that trailer around with them everywhere, but they never complain and in the end they are happy about it. How valuable, after all, to be able to go home any time, no matter where you may find yourself, eluding all intruders. It must be worth it.
They are a little vain about this convenient ability:  Look at me, a vulnerable and sensitive being, who is nevertheless protected from unwanted guests, and so always in possession of happiness and peace of mind!  It s not surprising the snail holds his head so high.
 At the same time I am glued to the earth, always touching it, always progressing, though slowly, and always capable of pulling loose from the soil into myself. Apr s moi le d luge, I don t care, the slightest kick may roll me anywhere. I can always get up again onto my single foot and reglue myself to the dirt where fate has planted me, and that s my pantry: the earth, the most common of foods. 
Joy to the snail! But they leave their proud slime on everything they touch. A silvery trail follows them. And maybe this points the way for the beaks of birds that love to eat them. Ay, there s the rub:  To be or not to be, that is the question!  Such vanity! But that s the danger they face.
Alone? Yes, the snail is quite alone. He has few friends. But he needs no friends to be happy. He sticks to Nature, he enjoys his perfect nearness, he is the friend of the soil which he kisses with his whole body. And he befriends the leaves, and the heavens toward which he proudly stretches his head, with eyes sensitive enough to signify nobility, slowness, wisdom, pride, vanity, fire.
No, he is nothing like the pig. He lacks those pitiful little scurrying anxious feet. That needful flight from shame. The stoic snail is tougher than that. He is more methodical, more proud, and without  a doubt less gluttonous than any pig   pigs after all are capricious, leaving behind one bit of food to chase after something else. That  panicky, hurried gluttony, that fear of missing out on something   that s not for the snail.
Nothing could be more beautiful than that deliberate and discreet advance. What it must cost them to glide so perfectly along the earth they honor with their presence! Each is like a ship trailing its silver wake. They proceed with a majesty that is all the more complete when you consider again the vulnerability of those highly sensitive eyeballs.
Is the anger of snails perceptible? What examples can be found? As it makes no other gestures, the snail s passion can probably only be discovered by a more profuse and rapid effusion of slime. The slime of pride. So one can see the expression of their rage is identical with that of their egotism. So they rule the world in their rich and silvery fashion.
The expression of their anger, like that of their pride, shines as it dries. But it also makes the trail that reveals them to predators. What s more, this trail is ephemeral and lasts only until the next rain.
That s how it is with everyone who speaks in an entirely subjective way, in verses and lines only, without taking care to build their phrases  into a solid dwelling with more than two dimensions. Something more durable than themselves.
But undoubtedly they don t feel this need. They are heroes, that is to say beings whose existence alone is a work of art   not artists who merely make masterpieces.
Here I touch on one of the main points of their lesson, something they have in common with all shelled beings: that shell, part of their essence, is at the same time a work of art, a monument. It lasts longer than they do.
That is the example that snails offer us: saints who make masterpieces  of their lives, works of art of their own perfection. They secrete form. Nothing outside themselves, their necessity, or their needs is their work. Nothing is out of proportion with their physical being. Nothing that is unnecessary or obligatory.
And so they delineate the duties of humanity: great thoughts come from the heart. Live a better life and make better verses. Morality and rhetoric combine in the ambition and desire of the wise.
How are they saints? Precisely by obedience to their nature. So: know yourself. And accept yourself for what you are. In agreement with your vices. In proportion with your measure.
What is most appropriate to the human being? Words. Decency. Our humanism.Go onApr s moi le d lugeheroesTranslated from the FrenchTranslated from the FrenchTranslated from the French

The room was suddenly rich and the great bay-window was Spawning snow and pink roses against it Soundlessly collateral and incompatible: World is suddener than we fancy it. World is crazier and more of it than we think, Incorrigibly plural. I peel and portion A tangerine and spit the pips and feel The drunkenness of things being various. And the fire flames with a bubbling sound for world Is more spiteful and gay than one supposes   On the tongue on the eyes on the ears in the palms of one's hands  There is more than glass between the snow and the huge roses.

I mean to say   I mean I keep meaning to   I mean amending   I mean correcting   I mean qualifying   I mean collecting   I mean X + X + X and so forth   I mean all possible values   I mean adding   I mean and also   I mean pileups happen when you can t see where you re going   I mean where you are   I mean your hand in front of your face   I mean my hand   I mean if that s all I can see   I mean if that s all I m looking at   I mean that s not all   I mean there is no end   I mean this isn t the beginning   I mean only means   I mean blow the house down with breathlessness   I mean a house of breathlessness   I mean the walls are braced against themselves   I mean brace yourself   I mean to take the house down with its own components   I mean throw the whole deck at it   I mean two-by-fours and oven mitts   I mean rocks hucking them at walls of rocks   I mean self-healing walls   I mean with insipid pocks   I mean BB dings in street signs   I mean bullet holes in stop signs   I mean to riddle   I mean all signs point to  yes    I mean eyelids are designed to admit some light   I mean sound   I mean boom   I mean faster than gravity   I mean I am not equal to the work   I mean I m over my head   I mean hovering   I mean levitating   I mean light as a feather wide as a plane   I mean fight as a feather (infinitesimally)   I mean I m going to talk about it   I mean talk about it by talking about talking about it   I mean write about it   I mean scrape it all towards me with the edge of my hand   I mean like a spray of crumbs   I mean pile   I mean to pile up and get on top of   I mean for the prospect   I mean for the pea beneath the mattress   I mean to feel the ceiling   I mean to figure it like a mime   I mean just imagine it   I mean kiss it   I mean I m already running out of air   I mean steam   I mean fire   I mean fight it   I mean feed   I mean with fire   I mean fire is not finite only fuel   I mean light is not finite only illumination   I mean things to illuminate   I mean to throw shadows   I mean I have an important question: is this important?

I saw then the white-eyed man leaning in to see if I was ready yet to go where he has been waiting to take me. I saw then the gnawing sounds my faith has been making and I saw too that the shape it sings in is the color of cast-iron mountains I drove so long to find I forgot I had been looking for them, for the you I once knew and the you that was born waiting for me to find you. I have been twisting and turning across these lifetimes where forgetting me is what you do so you don t have to look at yourself. I saw that I would drown in a creek carved out of a field our incarnations forged the first path through to those mountains. I invited you to stroll with me there again for the first time, to pause and sprawl in the grass while I read to you the poem you hadn t known you d been waiting to hear. I read until you finally slept and all your jagged syntaxes softened into rest. You re always driving so far from me towards the me I worry, without you, is eternity. I lay there, awake, keeping watch while you snored. I waited, as I always seem to, for you to wake up and come back to me.

Family dinner night, and we are deciding what to save: polar bears or slipper limpets. Girls in Afghanistan or the wolf. We can't save everything but the kids are ready with their banks, the season's extra, the not- ice cream. How does the Afghan girl feel to make our list? We bring more and more money to the table but the list outruns it. My mother comes in from visiting a friend in hospice, sick from all the chemo. When I get whatever it is, she says, I want you to do nothing. It's only May and already they've declared a statewide drought. Yesterday I hiked over a river that was not there. Coral reefs, my son says, that's what I want to save. And so we do. Whatever is happening to us is deductible. Silence of the was-river, was-bear. In the movies everyone is building some kind of ark.

                                 Being in a coma can play havoc with your sense of time. It can turn your eyes from brown to blue. It can grow hair on your belly, it can get you lost between bedroom and office. If you are to live in extra innings, you ll have to watch the corners, step around bad things, ignore insults and welcome loving hands that sculpt you in your chair. Being refrigerated and put to sleep, dropping out of time, you have to save your humor and guard it, a precious trove to bring out as needed, white strips on the road flying beneath your vehicle, eat them up, wake to a busy underground world, where people in body bags keep passing by, tilted toward you know where. Where half the people in your life have gone, dissolving your sense of time, which was never supposed to have an end.

The first thing I did against my will is see light. Older, in my mother s belly with a good mind, I sometimes dreamed different kinds of darkness. I kicked, had sweet dreams and nightmares something like death, unborn happiness, blind hallucinations, memories I can t name that still push me to act with unborn hands, all before breathing. What last thing will cross my mind after last rights and wrongs? They say the grand finale is like sleep, I may feel love s nuts and bolts unscrewing    it s best to be held tight. A pillow does not kiss. May I never waver in peaceful unmindfulness. I ve seen passionate suffocation, I ve felt exquisite pain. Far better doggerel:  Nurse, nurse, I m getting worse!  Undone, I d like my last thoughts to rhyme:  I did not lend  you my love. The end.I did not lend I did not lend you my love. The end.you my love. The end.

In the middle of that desert that didn t look like sandand sand only,and sand only, in the middle of those acacias, whiptails, and coyotes, someone yelled  La Migra!  and everyone ran.  La Migra!  and everyone ran. In that dried creek where 40 of us slept, we turned to each otherand you flew from my side in the dirt.and you flew from my side in the dirt. Black-throated sparrows and dawnhitting the tops of mesquites,hitting the tops of mesquites, beautifully. Against the herd of legs,you sprinted back toward me,you sprinted back toward me, I jumped on your shoulders,and we ran from the white trucks. It was then the gunand we ran from the white trucks. It was then the gun ready to press its index.I said,  freeze, Chino,  par  por favor! I said,  freeze, Chino,  par  por favor!  So I wouldn t touch their legs that kicked you,you pushed me under your chest,you pushed me under your chest, and I ve never thanked you. Beautiful Chino   Chino the only name I know to call you by   farewell your tattooed chest:farewell your tattooed chest: the M, the S, the 13. Farewellthe phone number you gave methe phone number you gave me when you went east to Virginia,and I went west to San Francisco.and I went west to San Francisco. You called twice a month,then your cousin said the gang you ran fromthen your cousin said the gang you ran from in San Salvadorfound you in Alexandria. Farewellfound you in Alexandria. Farewell your brown arms that shielded me then,that shield me now, from La Migra.that shield me now, from La Migra.

The bus arrives in the orchid heat, in the place where coffee grows like rubies in the valley s black soil. We disembark, walk in twos so we don t slip on the genesis mud. The woman next to me carries three cellphones as gifts for cousins and a bucket of chicken to share. How is it that I have come this far with nothing, that I am empty- handed in this country of blessings? A procession of rust-colored macaws glides above us. Their ashy shadows draw crosses onto all of our heads.

INSIDE THE GATEWAY: 1970S RED CLOGS WITH SIDE BUCKLE
 
The forever shoe,  which  points  homewards,  belongs to  my  mother.
When our house was  being built, she stepped onto the  driveway while
the tarmac was still wet, still setting. Ever since that step, the driveway,
which slants upwards,  bears an imprint of her 1971 footwear. Her foot-
print says,  Climb!  Come with me.  Whoever steps into that impression
becomes,  for a moment, the leggy wearer of a fire-red clog with a pirat-
ical silver buckle on the side.
OUTSIDE THE TEMPLE: GOLD AND SILVER SANDALS
The  sandals  which  will  make  a  female of me belong to many women.
The   front  of  the  temple  entrance  hides itself behind shoe-racks. Vis-
itors   enter  barefooted,  leaving   behind  the  dung,  dried frogs, spilled
petrol  and  ketchup  traces  of  the  streets.  Hundreds  of  pairs  of  gold
and  silver  sandals wait  here  for  the  women  who will re-emerge from
the  vigil  with  the  taste of  basil  leaf and sugar in  their deep-breathing
mouths  and  carpet  fibres between  their  toes.   The  sandals,  gold  and
silver,  seem all alike.  How  can the women tell them apart? They do tell
them apart. It  is  as if  each  pair  sings an  intimate mantra to its  owner,
audible  only to  her. One day I too shall return to expectant slippers that
stack  up  like the  moon  and  the  stars  outside a  marble  building;  one
day I shall not have to wear child's shoes.
 
SUNDAY BEFORE SCHOOL: WHITE SNEAKERS
Seven  years  of these shoes are a chemical memory.  The Convent ruled 
that  pupils' shoes  must  be white: absolutely white.  Who  can  imagine
a  1980s  shoe  that  was  absolutely  white,  without  any  logo,  with  no
swoosh,  not  a  single slogan?  Sunday evenings, before the school week,
I  crouched  down  on  the  pink  bathroom  tiles  and  painted  my  shoes
into  the  absolute  of  whiteness;  like  the  Alice  in Wonderland garden-
ers  repainting  roses.  This  task  was  performed  with a  toothbrush and
with  special  paste that annihilated so many design features.  Purity was
attained  by  the application  of  a whitener  that  stank  of scientific poly-
syllables.  Convent-girl  identity.  Tabula rasa.  Toxicity  and intoxication:
with  good  intentions,  getting  high on paste.
BAD MARRIAGE SHOES: SILVER BALLET SLIPPERS
When I met my ex, I was  already  committed to heels: black ankle  boots  
with  four-inch  stacks for  walking through snow;  French  cream curved
suede  stilettos for scaling fire-escape  ladders  on to  rooftops  to  admire
the  winter  sky;  even after I  left him,  scarlet satin  bedroom-only  spiky
mules  to  amuse myself.  Early  on, my ex  said that the way women walk
in  heels  looks ugly.  And my  nails  made  unnatural  social appearances:
emerald  lacquer;  cobalt;  incarnadine. Sign of a  bad  marriage:  I  began
to  wear  flats. The penitential  mermaid shoes,  worn once and once only,
were  a Gabor creation: distressed  silver  ballet  slippers  with netted and
criss-cross side  details  which  would  make  the material  seem  to  swish
with  the changes  of  light on feet that go walking.  Cool  as  moonlight on
a  tourist  coastline. But the  inner  stitching  hooked  the  softness  of  my
skin, which  has  always  been  too  soft;  but  I could not turn back, for we
had  tickets  to an evening  of  Mozart;  but the paper tissues that I stuffed
into  my  shoes  failed to act as  a  protective   lining.   Paper  tissue  snow-
flecks  teardropped  with crimson  blood created  a  trail  behind  me  as  I
ascended  the  many  tiers  of  the  wedding-cake concert hall.
BAREFOOT: PEARL PINK POLISH
Sitting  next  to someone  can  make  my  feet  curl:  shy,  self-destructive 
and  oyster-like, they want to  shuck  their cases,  to  present  themselves,
little undersea pinks; their skin  still  is  too  soft, their  toes still too long,
their  ankles still too slender, for a modern fit. But he  is not modern;  he
sits like stone, and my bare feet are cool, they will not have to bleed.Climb!  Come with me.

I suppose I shan t go fishing Pa, for fear of finding We re no fishers, Our folk, for all our bent For fish scraps and our Tolerance for muck dwellers and the like.   This creek is like no other, Pa, Inky cold and familiar, Don t drink from it, it Commands, don t kneel, don t stare down   Or wash in it, don't pry your shoes from off Your battered stubs, not yet, no jay Flashes past and asks how you mean To ask a shit creek to provide.   You exist. It would, too. It falls through These viney half-corrupted patches of nettled hickory and oak Into a muddy slough Into a culvert, splitting   Around the treatment plant Then joining itself back in a ramrod concrete Channel beneath pavement; Then into the lake, sludge, great Lake.   Do you follow? It s taking you somewhere, it matters Not where, Pa, it s a trip At your command, inaudible.   It s the postponed one We would have scheduled in these winding down days Together had we not been What we made of us. In the stagnant north woods. In the pale thick end-of-knowing daylight.

Though I am more Che than Chavez,I am still a dove.I am still a dove. I do not apologizeto you. Or to the stateto you. Or to the state of California. The IRS. New York. That administrator I bitin the third grade,in the third grade,who was deliciouswho was deliciousand sweet.and sweet.I, oh,I, oh, so cold. In the mind, the Dionysian defiles wallsthe Apollonian protects.the Apollonian protects.I am always lookingI am always lookingto take somethingto take something down. Usually it s me. Two bulls stand on a hill. The younger says,Father, let s run down and fuck a cow.Father, let s run down and fuck a cow.Father, let s run down and fuck a cow.The father, wiser, longer in the horn,The father, wiser, longer in the horn,higher on the grass,higher on the grass, reminds his son how Moses was also horned, beamed with light,that to handle a massive snake,that to handle a massive snake, to charm Pharaoh, to steal fire, to fly, to unzipthe sea, is to speakthe sea, is to speakand not tap vanity.and not tap vanity.Moses descended Mount Sinai with cracked slabsMoses descended Mount Sinai with cracked slabs and saw a golden calf. The father said to the young bull,No son, let s strut down and fuck them all.No son, let s strut down and fuck them all.Thus begins the beef  between bird and bee,Thus begins the beef  between bird and bee,the isthmus isolatingthe isthmus isolatingorder from chaos.order from chaos. My mind is made upof so many different cutsof so many different cutsof meat.of meat. My marbles stayas mixedas mixedas my metaphors. As my myths.as my metaphors. As my myths.As myself.As myself. At parties my favoriteicebreaker involves asking strangersicebreaker involves asking strangers to describe themselveswith three words. Their descriptionswith three words. Their descriptions are a slipping are a slipping away to change clothes. Identity and ironyneatly knit in an ugly Christmas sweater.neatly knit in an ugly Christmas sweater. Sometimes I feel so Socratic: oft-laureled, poison-palmed, toga-partied, exasperated by the masses:I wouldn t have guessed ambitious.I wouldn t have guessed ambitious.Free-spirited, you don t say.Free-spirited, you don t say.Other times I feel like the womanOther times I feel like the womanrambling among the vapors escaping the groundrambling among the vapors escaping the ground in Iceland s volcanic canyon,making a busmaking a busan em dashan em dashin a rest stop,in a rest stop, where some fifty-odd persons searching for themselvesin true existentialismin true existentialismare yellow lupines growingare yellow lupines growingon the side of the road. An epiphany canon the side of the road. An epiphany cannot be achieved,not be achieved,as a cedar waxwingas a cedar waxwing cannot be more cedarqua waxwing. Eventually what we re lookingqua waxwing. Eventually what we re looking for appears. Sometimes incitation opens at the bottom of a straw, a spoon, a barrel of wine,the windfall happens while eating farfalle,the windfall happens while eating farfalle,while flipping throughwhile flipping throughThe Autobiography of a Brown Buffalo. At the moonThe Autobiography of a Brown Buffalo. At the moonThe Autobiography of a Brown Buffalome the animal roofsme the animal roofsatop brownstones, sin verg enza.atop brownstones, sin verg enza.Upwards our eyes scamper,Upwards our eyes scamper,a reflex action,a reflex action,when inserting an objectwhen inserting an objectin the mouth,in the mouth, even when the object is a gun. Over hills a road erodes the way home.Only after the Coast GuardOnly after the Coast Guard has readied a helicopter, do wedescend the cold volcano in Eldg j descend the cold volcano in Eldg j  to realize we are the womanin the search party lookingin the search party lookingfor ourselves.for ourselves.to poetry.to poetry.In moments of ecstasyIn moments of ecstasywe are liftedwe are lifted          At the shore of the Aegean Seaor at the banksor at the banksof the river Evros,of the river Evros, he loosened his sandalswhile Pegasus stamped the soil,while Pegasus stamped the soil,crushing reedscrushing reedsand hoofing awayand hoofing awaystray wood. The sun bandagedstray wood. The sun bandagedlight on a skylight on a sky that would not heal.Perseus,Perseus,with eyes heavenward,with eyes heavenward,formed the shapes of gods into clouds,formed the shapes of gods into clouds,slipped his handslipped his handinto the woven sack,into the woven sack,and felt the flintand felt the flintof primped snakes. He thought,of primped snakes. He thought,But it is the cold weight of scales that protects.But it is the cold weight of scales that protects.As sure as a child,As sure as a child, he lined leaves rockedto sleep by saltto sleep by saltwater waveswater wavesfor a bed,for a bed,so as not to,so as not to,with sand,with sand,or with hubris,or with hubris,bruise Medusa sbruise Medusa sdisunited head. One day,disunited head. One day,like a beam through skylight,like a beam through skylight,we realizewe realizelife is a puddle jumper of  tragedy.life is a puddle jumper of  tragedy.Some stones sink fastSome stones sink fastyet still hold light. So phantom are a statue syet still hold light. So phantom are a statue sbusted arms and toes. Everything must go.busted arms and toes. Everything must go. And yet I still hanger hopewhen shopping the racks of discountwhen shopping the racks of discountstores. Veni vidi vici when I see Vince,stores. Veni vidi vici when I see Vince, freeze when I see the coiled coifof Versace s emblem. Like Sisyphus,of Versace s emblem. Like Sisyphus, errybody thinkthey headed for the top.they headed for the top.Sing, started from the bottom,Sing, started from the bottom,started from the bottom,to my reflectionto my reflectionin the dressing room mirror,in the dressing room mirror,now we here boynow we here boynow we here boywhen I rememberwhen I rememberthatthatOh my god Becky, look at her buttOh my god Becky, look at her buttOh my god Becky, look at her buttpasses the Bechdel test.passes the Bechdel test. I have eaten from the tree the fig that sullies and seenthat the meat s not alwaysthat the meat s not alwaysfair.fair.I was,I was,like Perseuslike Perseusand Sir Mix-a-Lot,and Sir Mix-a-Lot, born by a rivof water,of water,felled by pride whenfelled by pride whena brown boy, tattooed with age,a brown boy, tattooed with age, obsessed with fame, took his talentsto Vermont to kiss trees and tapto Vermont to kiss trees and tapsyrup from the sap.syrup from the sap.There and thereThere and thereand there, he kissed. Here and hereand there, he kissed. Here and here he drank.So drunk he hugged an oldSo drunk he hugged an oldwhite womanwhite womanoff the ground. None of the godsoff the ground. None of the godsI loveI love love me. To be tipsyis to leverage one s self.is to leverage one s self.Or so I m told. The pulleyOr so I m told. The pulley is considered civilization shighest achievement.highest achievement.IcarusIcaruskilled himselfkilled himselfbeing lifted.being lifted.

                                                        I To the meeting despair of eyes in the street, offer Your eyes on plates and your liver on skewers of pity. When the Jericho sky is heaped with clouds which the sun Trumpets above, respond to Apocalypse With a headache. In spirit follow The young men to the war, up Everest. Be shot. For the uncreating chaos Claims you in marriage: though a man, you were ever                                                                                                  a bride. Ever among the supple surface of summer-brown muscle The fountaining evening chatter under the stars, The student who chucks back his forelock in front of a glass, You only longed for your longing to last. The engine in you, anxiety, Is a grave lecher, a globe-trotter, one With moods of straw, the winds that blow him, aeroplanes. 'Whatever happens, I shall never be alone, I shall always have a fare, an affair, or a revolution.'                                                          II I am so close to you I will confess to you I am all that you do.   In thoughts where pity is the same as cruelty Your life is mine. Whether What fears and falters is myself Or yourself   all The apprehension of this time, We are both one. At night I'm flooded by the future Incoming tide of the unharnessed war. Beyond the blacked-out windows of our nightmare Facts race their hundred miles an hour In iron circles on an iron plain. The riders of those race-cars lose All sense of where they are. Ridden by their speed, the men Are their machines.                                                        III All I can foresee now   more I shall learn   Is that our fear creates its opposite. Our peace is war. When you choose a mirror for a lover It shows you your own image as a gunman. You are a ghost amid the flares of shellfire Less living than The last war dead whose veins of mineral We mine for here.                                                          IV Shall I ever reach The field enclosed by stones In the high mountains Where the scytheless wind Flushes the swayed grasses? Where clouds without rain Add to the sun Their mirroring shine? The simple machinery is here Clear room clear day clear desk And the hand with its power To make the heart pour Into the word, as the sun Moves upward through the corn. Meanwhile, where nothing's sacred And love no longer willed Nor our true purpose conscious, Holy is lucidity And the mind that dare explain.  

I was planted, a crop not a boy but with headlong technique, everything in me telling to be coursed through with water and emptiness                                                             The blank was worth tending a matter of tight, small discretions separating from youth like a bee It's just silence I've been talking about Into hills I tried things I was made of What was not in my memory, not math yet patched all together I required this armor "wrestling with old champions body against body"                                                                                                                      Scribbling down the solution "by little light attacks" A life is at odds and we solve it a shadow itself "Understanding makes profit of everything arranges, acts, and             reigns," gives knowledge out in a swan Virtue wasn't a mountain, not a field or was it me brooding                                                             "Too ill to instruct others," this awareness of slow moving and ditch of the past of the subject A few lumps on the ground like a book "Mixing with men is wonderfully useful" but hard practice                                                                                                                 "For our boy, a closet, a garden, the table and bed, solitude, company, morning and evening, all hours will be the same, all places will be his study"                                                             He's in philosophy, and mingled let him forgive it I have been happy in rooms Gambling with pocket, with babble "he will not say his lesson as do it" and the unit is character, "repeated in actions"                                                           Rising to beg and confounding I hear it now, in our ears

That this mountainside looks like a face is accidental, which is a shame, for I dearly love to laugh. The touch-smoothed redwood cross-section, in its rings of growth and brightness, seems like a sun seen from underwater, wobbly as jelly, mocking my inability to find a job, my food stamps, and saddens me to see the teens tagging themselves in nearby places to earn a virtual friend's respect, or boasting other symptoms of youth while leaving their greasy fingerprints on the thick lenses of my glasses, mocking my desire for artwork to remain packed in straw, and in music for sleepers halfway awake to grow wild in. It all gives me faith in arranging, I guess, when there is nothing else I seem much good at but fuss and copy and paste, with a head full of so many other worries. Got a check today. Bought a book I can't read without it putting me to sleep with its out-of-date luxuriousness. So instead of reading it, I stayed up and listened to Harry Partch's songAnd on the Seventh Day Petals Fell in Petaluma,And on the Seventh Day Petals Fell in Petaluma dedicating it to the memory of Ramon Novarro, hoping it would arch electrically above him with all the characteristics of fire all night, all day, and soak his early spring colors in a late autumn sun as pale as silver and fern-green skiesto draw lightto draw light through midnight and steer instead his valley's vista toward my own simple neighborhood loneliness with nothing better to do than lie back and lecture those cultured Internet boys on their own death's primitive and permanent cartoons, to walk carefully and not step on any snails, the poor, the rough skin bundles, or shiny boners poking out from satin robes. This light, is dark. And on the seventh day petals fell on Petaluma, forgiving those who hurried past before stuffed with poo and feathers underneath the hot yellow heat that I wish would ignite all the unopened envelopes piling up on the table by my front door, (and burn up all of the time I've spent on all of the things I can't put my finger toward). I went for a walk this evening and found a speckled turkey egg where the river settled into the mud of the salt flats. I looked at the burnished iris of the eye of a trout. A gleaming Atlantic coin. Thinking even the wind tonight could speak, blowing in seeds not yet caught on the coat of the dog. Still, life. And all the needs in this world.

my old friend I wonder how far north you travel?              The road goes west starting two doors up from the Dog s Bollocks ending at sunset.              So many sunsets Facebook and Instagram couldn t contain them. So many yellow lines, white stripes there s hardly a Valiant left to defy them.              Now the years overtake us. Visits as a boy to Uncle Bruce and Aunty Lindy in their K Rd council flat led me to the greatness of  the great north whipping its dusty tail up to the skyline of  Reinga.               Yet why do I see your darkness as silence my friend? You re a sleek black eel pumping blood all the way to Karekare, to Muriwai, to Bethells, to Piha, and our vehicles surf the surges back to K Rd, back and forth, LOL, rocking up our shock absorbers and surfboards.              Keep bringing the waves Great North Road. Keep saving the whales! Keep the toheroas shining tucked away from spades in sandy bolt-holes. Smile in your cars and honk honk honk on the Great North Road.

          1   I wake in a dark flat To the soft roar of the world. Pigeons neck on the white Roofs as I draw the curtains And look out over London Rain-fresh in the morning light.   This is our element, the bright Reason on which we rely For the long-term solutions. The orators yap, and guns Go off in a back street; But the faith doesn t die   That in our time these things Will amaze the literate children In their non-sectarian schools And the dark places be Ablaze with love and poetry When the power of good prevails.   What middle-class shits we are To imagine for one second That our privileged ideals Are divine wisdom, and the dim Forms that kneel at noon In the city not ourselves.             2   I am going home by sea For the first time in years. Somebody thumbs a guitar On the dark deck, while a gull Dreams at the masthead, The moon-splashed waves exult.   At dawn the ship trembles, turns In a wide arc to back Shuddering up the grey lough Past lightship and buoy, Slipway and dry dock Where a naked bulb burns;   And I step ashore in a fine rain To a city so changed By five years of war I scarcely recognize The places I grew up in, The faces that try to explain.   But the hills are still the same Grey-blue above Belfast. Perhaps if I d stayed behind And lived it bomb by bomb I might have grown up at last And learnt what is meant by home.  

A sobering thought, the idea of you stretched there, bittern, under a dark sky, your exposed bones yellow too in a ditch among cold stones, ice glittering everywhere on bog and river, the whole unfortunate country frozen over and your voice stilled by enforced sobriety   a thought more wrenching than the fall of Troy because more intimate; for we d hear your shout of delight from a pale patch of watery sunlight out on the mud there as you took your first drink of the day and now, destroyed by thirst, you lie in brambles while the rats rotate. I d ve broken the ice for you, given an inkling; now, had I known it, we might both be drinking and singing too; for ours is the same story. Others have perished   heron, blackbird, thrushes   and lie shivering like you under whin-bushes; but I mourn only the bittern, withdrawn and solitary, who used to carouse alone among the rushes and sleep rough in the star-glimmering bog-drain. It used to be, with characters like us, they d let us wander the roads in wind and rain or lock us up and throw away the key   but now they have a cure for these psychoses as indeed they do for most social diseases and, rich at last, we can forget our pain. She says I m done for if I drink again; so now, relieved of dangerous stimuli, as peace with my plastic bottle of H2O2 and the slack strings of insouciance, I sit with bronze Kavanagh on his canal-bank seat not in  the tremendous silence of mid-July  but the fast bright zing of a winter afternoon dizzy with head-set, flash-bulb and digifone, to learn the tao he once claimed as his owntao and share with him the moor-hen and the swan, the thoughtless lyric of a cloud in the sky and the play of light and shadow on the slow commemorative waters; relax, go with the flow.  

My mother spoke perfectly well, and I understood.Fabi and  faser los deber, and I d do my chores.Fabi and  faser los deberFabi traseme meio litro de leite, I brought her half a liter of milk.Fabi traseme meio litro de leiteDes  pra do a Cora que ama   le pago   Des  pra do a Cora que ama   le pago   I told Do a Cora she d get paid tomorrow.Deya iso gur    stop that, child   and I would stop.Deya iso gur  But my teacher didn t understand. She d send home letters in my notebook all in red, like her face, and signed at the bottom. But my mother didn t understand.Le iso pra mim, ijo, and I d read them to her.Le iso pra mim, ijo But my mother didn t understand.Qu  fiseste meu f o   what did you do, child   Qu  fiseste meu f ote dise a que portaras bien, and I did behave myself.te dise a que portaras biendid The story repeated itself for months. My teacher wrote, but my mother didn t understand. My teacher wrote, but my mother didn t understand. Then one day my mother understood. She said, Meu f o, tu ter s que deiy  la iscuela   Meu f o, tu ter s que deiy  la iscuela so I quit that school.    Translated from the Portu ol Translated from the Portu ol Translated from the Portu ol Translated from the Portu ol 

She s got a hundred & two temperature, delivery room nurses said. You reShe s got a hundred & two temperature gonna live, though   long enough to know you re going to go as quickly as you came, gonna make your mother swear by you, going to shake your Bible with red-tipped nails before you vanish into Chicago South Side skies that bleed   not like watercolor, not like a wound, not like a fat, bitten plum   not necessarily. No, not necessarily. Nothing that precious or predictable. Speak nicely to others & they will nicelySpeak nicely to others & they will nicelyspeak to you, your mother said. No, not so, you said fairlyspeak to you close to the end. No time to wait for mother s ride home or for saviors, coming soon.

Before Gilgamesh invented the kaleidoscope and Galileo the Rubik s cube, before the scimitar-horned oryx went missing, before the tamarind trees went bare, before the stars  eyelids were wrapped in tinfoil, before the leaves could gnaw on water, before electrons made donations, before the owl wore a mask, before the wind had a sound, before the moon had a name and the smoke a spine, before the tulips crossed their legs, before the tongue was armored, before the ghosts rode centaurs to riots, before cyberspace was culled and belly buttons sown to wombs, before the taste had an after, before intellect became property and thunder premeditated, before the New, New World, before a stone wished to be more than a stone, before we had a change of clothes, before the grass was color-blind, before the rivers lost their fingers, and the rain stopped teething, before the kings were all beheaded, the gravedigger neither young nor old, before a lion was still a lion, before the girls were all killed, before the trapeze gave way.        We hung           suspended in time by the arches of our curved feet and this tickled the gods, tickled them to death.        & I  think our silence cut us loose, let us go falling from the doubt, secretly thrilled at the hems and ever so eager to break.

Not having spoken for years now, I know you claim exile from my consciousness. Yet I wear mourning whole nights through for that embrace that warmed my ignorant lust even past intimacies you had dreamed. I played your daughter-husband, lover-son, to earn both Abraham and Ishmael's guilt for your indulgence, and in time, reproach. Who sent us to that wilderness we both now know, although I blamed you for that house of women too many years. But Time is a waiting woman, not some old man with a stupid beard, and when I finally met my father I found him arrogant and dull, a formican liar with an Austrian accent. Well, we meet the phantom that we long for in the end, and getting there is half the grief. Meanwhile, my theories rearrange themselves like sand before this woman whose flaccid breasts sway with her stumblings, whose diamonds still thaw pity from my eyes. You're older than I thought. But so am I, and grateful that we've come to this: a ragged truce, an affirmation in me tht your strength, your pushiness, your sharp love, your embroidery of lies all, all were survival tools, as when, during our personal diaspora, you stood in some far country blocks away, burning poems I no longer sent you like Yahrzeit candles in my name, unsure of me at last who sought a birthright elsewhere, beyond the oasis of your curse, even beyond that last mirage, your blessing. Mother, in ways neither of us can ever understand, I have come home.  

The letters still come for Mrs Watters, who must, at one time, have warmed this house and lived as we do. Mostly small matters   the rolled calendar that, had she stayed, might hang now where I drew the rusted nail, the catalogues, the last gas bill unpaid    and always Mrs Watters. So for meMrs the spirit of the house is feminine, its whisper of the one who, constantly, draws letters that assume she has never gone. On which I weekly write, without conviction: 'No longer living here. Address unknown.'

We danced to rancorous tunes on spiked ground and our knees sang with each puncture, so that several agouti colonies, melanic in our russet strengths, learned as wild rats to scurry or guard ourselves from skin-spite. Immune from nocturnal drowsiness we strong-bellied creatures assembled, campaigned; gyrated to blowed trumpets and cradled songs, but, us black rats with our rogue swagger that spoke of foreign ports, pranced our survival shuffle in night s murky dance halls. Each step our single prayer, each jab our benediction. This tart sermon containered our septic hurts and lean swaggers. On the strike of dawn, we skittered from shadows, the redeemed walking day s straight-road into warpland.

Matarose never comes home She s hungry like a wolf She s rosa de mota in lacroix all the girls hail on queens boulevard All the views she s killed in the name of iman & yasmin le bon Mata s quite meta Mata means kill Rose a curve from the real meat of it all She s part my little pony into bronies she has loved & loved not by astro-pony compatibility chart She s the queerest part of me What s left after the clubs close & has yet to go home she never goes when she writes I always write in bed just woofed down a 3 musketeers                          mata s on a mission which is to say I m my most           queer my most mata-rose when sherose when she& I don t need all the girls& I don t need all the girlsin the yardin the yarddon t needdon t needall the girls in the yardall the girls in the yardby which I meanby which I meanthe onethe one who s not the one whose blocked texts & torn up wish you wells flicker still      That riddle get you killed kindof a woman for whomof a woman for whom matarose almost cut off a foot Went to the end of twobuck ghosting railsMy man is a little afraidMy man is a little afraid of mata            he accepts her tho Lets her come & go because I stay I am always with him because mata just wants every 7 train to dissolve into g-dragon sound wants you to howlboom mata mataboom mata mataboom mata mataboom mata matawowwowg-mata dragonroseg-mata dragonrose The most pony of them allg-mata 7 dragontrainroseg-mata 7 dragontrainroseDon t wait upDon t wait upNever last stop never comesNever last stop never comesboom mata mataboom mata mataboom mata mata homeboom mata mata home

Whether the rain on Mars was delicate or brutal              whether it was blue or gray whether it fell on bare rocks              that remained bare                           or on fertile ground              that raised large forests of leafing trees it could not last.                           Mars froze eventually in the same duration                           that Venus by contrast                                         bowed her burning head              in noxious vapors and gas clouds.        On planet Earth meanwhile                           after half a billion years                                         of continuous volcano-havoc                           meteor storms              earthquakes               and lightning strikes vapor stored in the atmosphere                           eventually began falling.                                         It soothed the fires. When the fires died              it fell silently on the first outcrops of moss.                           On the tender grass with a sizzle.              With more strenuous drumming                           on the resilient fronds of ferns. It became an orchestra of millions              across the luxurious expanse of the tree canopy.       Then the sun wiped its forehead                                        with long filmy fingers and beamed afresh. It worked through to creatures                           flourishing beneath the canopy              and persuaded them to                                        interrupt their work of scouring on all fours              for delectable roots and berries. In the clarified light                           they stared at their hands. They saw the wrinkled fingertips              that gave them a firm grip                           on slippery branches and vines gradually smooth      and soften. They rose in amazement                           onto their hind legs and crept from shelter                           across the dazzling savannah.       After a summer of twelve thousand years after the interruptions of ice after one particular inundation              and the shadow of an ark                           darkening fish-shoals as they scooted over hills and valleys after the blaze of one civilization                           then another after the destruction of several experiments                           with law and order after the extinction                           of many beautiful languages rain by and large              found its place in the scheme of things. It began to defeat its purpose              on the private sky of umbrellas. It babbled through long green fields                           and melted into the seams of poetry. It larked in the puddle of its many names. Cobblers and chair legs and pipe stems.              Frogs and jugs and beards.                           Cats and dogs. Men.       Although they are shaped like a parachute                           thanks to the air pressure beneath them raindrops                     explode on landing. Then the sun bears down again              fitting his monocle into his eye.              The glass flashes and burns.                           The rain sweats and evaporates into the ocean of its air.              The ocean continues on its way                           continually overflowing here and there in quick little splashes              or reckless floods and drenching. It is delicate or brutal. It is blue sometimes              and sometimes gray. Sometimes it falls on bare rocks              at others                     it raises                           large forests of leafing trees.

words are birds that arrive with books and spring they love clouds the wind and trees some words are messengers that come from far away from distant lands for them there are no borders only stars moon and sun some words are familiar like canaries others are exotic like the quetzal bird some can stand the cold others migrate with the sun to the south some words die caged  they're difficult to translate and others build nests have chicks warm them feed them teach them how to fly and one day they go away in flocks the letters on this page are the prints they leave by the sea

               We re not all lesbians at this bar and grill (not yet?        not practicing? only in heart?), chiaroscuro as the room is        chiaroscuro                 with expensive ambiance and dear cuts of meat                               and fish overlaid with nouveau fruit sauce, it s clear                   that the most manly woman among us, older,                                       wearing cowboy boots and a turquoise bolo,                                      is probably neither entirely straight nor wholly                                   queer. When she begins to confess her  secret                                           it s her holding of a piece of land, acres                                            of sweet desert; its muddy roads, its remote                                     sublime have four-wheeled deep into her being.                                 She s probably someone s heavenly grandmother,                                     as I m still someone s heavenly wife, despite                                      the separation. Appearance does not really appear,                 Appearance does not really appear,               but it appears to appear, yet, for a moment, it seems               but it appears to appear,                     our conversation may open up unexpectedly                                          or shatter into awkwardness over the word                                               girlfriends: who in the rainy summers                         girlfriends                of our youths, we all played with our girlfriends,                                     (what do I mean by  girlfriend?  what do you girlfriend?              mean by yours?) It s only then, as one of the younger                              women (the most lovely, so silver with bracelets                                        and earrings and a noticeable ring) laughs                                       that I begin to guess her inclination, Does it really                Does it really                    appear to appear, or only apparently appear                    appear to appear, or only apparently appear               to appear? It s a long way from Plato s symposium               to appear?             to this bar and grill in Arizona. At that ancient feast                     whenever a number of individuals have a common name,        whenever a number of individuals have a common name,                  they have also a common  idea  or  form  only                  they have also a common  idea  or  form             men reclined upon the couches, and the only the love                               of man for man was love s ideal, the impulse                                   toward some boyish form becoming the ascension                                 of being to some ever truer realm, as the souls                                        of men became pregnant and gave birth to                                             not only beauty, truth, and goodness,  but             the heavenly bed, created by God  a heavenly man,               a heavenly dog, a heavenly cat, and so on through                        a whole Noah s ark,  but no heavenly woman, much less                      a heavenly lesbian, for since Aristotle,  Lesbian rule                       has meant that measure made of lead so it could be bent                   to a curved or crooked wall. Because we are all women,                      how can we speak of love? In the beginning, banished                     from the realm of discourse, assigned to love s servitude                           not its speech, to be love s body not its tongue,                              so no one here speaks of her feeling, much less thinks                    to make it another s measure. In our mouths, the tongue s                       a knife, each word a wild edge, where we stammer                                  only our own wound, a drop of blood sensual                                      on the tongue, a distinctive taste of salt, more                                   mollusk perhaps wrapped around an I of sand I                     than pearl, a syllable of milk or nipple, some                                         private body within the body, the you behindyou               your eyes, as if being itself were poetry passionate             with nascent and protean neologism, full of the gaps              of being, the oblique richness of a depth in which we                 begin to glimpse each other, mysterious and solo                        as we are, black stubborn pearls of being.                     If we spoke of Plato, and we don t; each of us                          was banished from the womb by virtue                    of having a womb, to this unpredictable realm                         where each of us would have to discover                     her self, that wild tongue never delineated,                even in shadow, upon the philosopher s cave wall.  

A witch can charm milk from an ax handle. A witch bewitches a man's shoe. A witch sleeps naked. "Witch ointment" on the back will allow you to fly through the air.  A witch carries the four of clubs in her sleeve. A witch may be sickened at the scent of roasting meat. A witch will neither sink nor swim. When crushed, a witch's bones will make a fine glue. A witch will pretend not to be looking at ber own image in a window. A witch will gaze wistfully at the glitter of a clear night. A witch may take the form of a cat in order to sneak into a good man's chamber. A witch's breasts will be pointed rather than round, as discovered in the trials of the 1950s. A powerful witch may cause a storm at sea. With a glance, she will make rancid the fresh butter of her righteous neighbor. Even our fastest dogs cannot catch a witch-hare. A witch has been known to cry out while her husband places inside her the image of a child. A witch may be burned for tying knots in a marriage bed. A witch may produce no child for years at a time. A witch may speak a foreign language to no one in particular. She may appear to frown when she believes she is smiling. If her husband dies unexpectedly, she may refuse to marry his brother. A witch has been known to weep at the sight of her own child. She may appear to be acting in a silent film whose placards are missing In Hollywood the sky is made of tin. A witch makes her world of air, then fire, then the planets. Of cardboard, then ink, then a compass. A witch desires to walk rather than be carried or pushed in a cart. When walking a witch will turn suddenly and pretend to look at something very small. The happiness of an entire house maybe ruined by witch hair touching a metal cross. The devil does not speak to a witch. He only moves his tongue. An executioner may find the body of a witch insensitive to an iron spike. An unrepentant witch may be converted with a frttle lead in the eye. Enchanting witchpowder may be hidden in a girl's hair. When a witch is hungry, she can make a soup by stirring water with her hand. I have heard of a poor woman changing herself into a pigeon. At times a witch will seem to struggle against an unknown force stronger than herself. She will know things she has not seen with her eyes. She will have opinions about distant cities. A witch may cry out sharply at the sight of a known criminal dying of thirst.   She finds it difficult to overcome the sadness of the last war.   A nightmare is witchwork. The witch elm is sometimes referred to as "all heart." As in, "she was thrown into a common chest of witch elm." When a witch desires something that is not hers, she will slip it into her glove. An overwhelming power compels her to take something from a rich man's shelf.   I have personally known a nervous young woman who often walked in her sleep. Isn't there something witchlike about a sleepwalker who wanders through the house with matches? The skin of a real witch makes a delicate binding for a book of common prayer. When all the witches in your town have been set on fire, their smoke will fill your mouth. It will teach you new words. It will tell you what you've done.

1


			mudstone crumbs
			shell
			fragments
			finest sand
			tidal
			grind
			every day
			every
			night
			a medium of
			crawling
			life
			compressed
			baked
			lifted
			blown away


			salt
			marsh
			shallow
			soil
			shingle
			marram
			grass
			fescue
			grass
			tidal
			path
			creek
			of
			pollen
			falls
			in whispers



			mudstone crumbs
			shell
			fragments
			finest sand
			tidal
			grind
			every day
			every
			night
			a medium of
			crawling
			life
			compressed
			baked
			lifted
			blown away


			salt
			marsh
			shallow
			soil
			shingle
			marram
			grass
			fescue
			grass
			tidal
			path
			creek
			of
			pollen
			falls
			in whispers



			mudstone crumbs
			shell
			fragments
			finest sand
			tidal
			grind
			every day
			every
			night
			a medium of
			crawling
			life
			compressed
			baked
			lifted
			blown away


			salt
			marsh
			shallow
			soil
			shingle
			marram
			grass
			fescue
			grass
			tidal
			path
			creek
			of
			pollen
			falls
			in whispers


			mudstone crumbs
			shell
			fragments
			finest sand
			tidal
			grind
			every day
			every
			night
			a medium of
			crawling
			life
			compressed
			baked
			lifted
			blown away

			salt
			marsh
			shallow
			soil
			shingle
			marram
			grass
			fescue
			grass
			tidal
			path
			creek
			of
			pollen
			falls
			in whispers2Two large cormorants flew rapidly and very low across the water heading directly towards Langstone Rock, where Dawlish Warren joins the coast just beyond the western edge of the Exe estuary. Their wing tips were almost touching the choppy water. This must have been about 7:45 on Friday morning; I was thirty yards or so out in the sea, only my head visible between the waves that the cormorants flew in among as they powered along one behind the other. I had come down the concrete lifeboat ramp and taken just a few steps on wet sand scattered with various shells, little gleaming stones, and scraps of seaweed, getting quickly into the cool water. The sky was piled up with dark gray cloud overhead but clear and bright at the horizon. The two birds passed close by and continued on their way indifferent to me watching them from the water and they gave no indication if they saw anything unusual. 
she swam 
only at night 
on the spring tides
in the silk light of water
slipping her over
the mud flats
when they studied why she did it
drifted far beyond her limits
though it made her vulnerable to prey
several theories came
but none swam
at night in a spring tide
in the silk light unsure
of itself
becoming only what is left
after breaking
she swam 
only at night 
on the spring tides
in the silk light of water
slipping her over
the mud flatswhen they studied why she did it
drifted far beyond her limits
though it made her vulnerable to preyseveral theories came
but none swam
at night in a spring tide
in the silk light unsure
of itself
becoming only what is left
after breaking3
 
herring gull
black-headed gull
arctic tern
oystercatcher
turnstone
sanderling
carrion crow
jackdaw
white wagtail
rock pipit
peregrine
kestrel
buzzard
brent goose
cormorant
kingfisher
farther out
gannet
stomach of fur
coughed up at low tide
stranded
snowfall of fur
dusting the mouth
sanded
out of this
worms fall
soft as whispers
coiling into faun-
ing  Aphrodita 
& out of her hair come the corpses
of a swallowed sea
herring gull
black-headed gull
arctic tern
oystercatcher
turnstone
sanderling
carrion crow
jackdaw
white wagtail
rock pipit
peregrine
kestrel
buzzard
brent goose
cormorant
kingfisher
farther out
gannet
stomach of fur
coughed up at low tide
stranded
snowfall of fur
dusting the mouth
sanded
out of this
worms fall
soft as whispers
coiling into faun-
ing  Aphrodita 
& out of her hair come the corpses
of a swallowed sea4
 
mussel
shell
oyster shell
clam
shell
cockle shell
whelk
shell
limpet shell
winkle
shell
razor shell
crab shell
lobster
shell
prawn shell
sea
lettuce
she
              windblown sand
              seashell sand
              shifting sand
she
              sea sandwort
              sea rocket
              sea holly
she
               half sand
she both sea
               she half sea
she both sand
she is a both-formed thing
she
               wool sand
               cotton sand
               wood sand
she
               sea leather
               sea crystal
               sea skin
she
               half wool
she both skin
               she half skin
she both wool
she is a woollen skin
she
               asphalt soil
               nylon soil
               sandy soil
she
               landscape
               escape
               seascape
she half soil
               she both scape
she half scape
               she both soil
she escapes
mussel
shell
oyster shell
clam
shell
cockle shell
whelk
shell
limpet shell
winkle
shell
razor shell
crab shell
lobster
shell
prawn shell
sea
lettuce
she
              windblown sand
              seashell sand
              shifting sand
she
              sea sandwort
              sea rocket
              sea holly
she
               half sand
she both sea
               she half sea
she both sand
she is a both-formed thing
she
               wool sand
               cotton sand
               wood sand
she
               sea leather
               sea crystal
               sea skin
she
               half wool
she both skin
               she half skin
she both wool
she is a woollen skin
she
               asphalt soil
               nylon soil
               sandy soil
she
               landscape
               escape
               seascape
she half soil
               she both scape
she half scape
               she both soil
she escapes5And swimming my slow breast stroke out to the channel I saw a darkwinged butterfly come flying in above the waves, moving with the breeze, heading for the dunes. Was this a migrant painted lady, third generation, from Africa?
drifter           on the surface
upside           down dead
                       water
                       floater             upper                  sheltered
                           on the littoral fringe
                                                lower                  very sheltered
                            swimmer upward                 of hundreds    of thousands
                                                                             of hundreds    of thousands
of hundreds   of thousands   of hundreds   of thousands   of hundreds
       of thousands   of hundreds   of thousands   of hundreds   of
thousands        of hundreds        of thousands       of hundreds             of
thousands        of hundreds        of thousands       of hundreds             of
thousands        of hundreds        of thousands       of hundreds             of
thousands        of hundreds        of houses             of hundreds             of
houses of          of hundreds        of houses             of hundreds             of
houses of          of sands               of houses             of sand                      of
houses of          of sand                 of hums               of sand                      of
hums                 of sand                 of hum                 of sand                      of
humming                     

That I would even use the phrase suggests A false yet useful worldliness, a scope Far greater than my caste would indicate. The phrase signals,  I ve lived abroad! I ve watched The Premier League in European pubs!  In fact I hate the game; its ethos rests On boring strategies and rules that cope,cope, Merely, with competition s link to fate, How luck and skill dovetail in every botched Clear kick on goal, and every header rubs   Against the grain of what is beautiful In sport, at least to my Yankee Doodle eyes. Give me smashmouth football over soccer. Give me concussions, shattered bones, ripped muscles, Strategies of season-long attrition. Give me huge men heaving their bountiful Frames against each other with such grace that size Seems incidental to the role of stalker Of fleet backs and fleeter ends, men who bustle Along the line of scrimmage on a mission.   A hundred and sixty-pound defensive end, I was the scourge of JV quarterbacks. I blitzed on every down, so spent the game With most the action at my back; the coach Didn t seem to care; he was drunk on power And vodka, said my job was to defend Right flank from sweeps and register some sacks. Helter skelter, I dreamed of gridiron fame. Much less than mediocre, I could not broach The fact of pain, the realm where bruises flower.

The trees have sex, Teach, Focus. Tohu Bohu Chaos in a green light. Alone again. How alone I twist at the end of thought when illness is forgot and the speaker is punched on the bark on the soft models. The old abbot looked at us and laughed. He loved electronic gadgets for his tomb. You were as beautiful as six almonds as beautiful as the naked foot of the messenger of peace. You sat in a corner of the page.

        I never really knew if Johanna Hirshhorn was actually Joe s only daughter. Jim Brodey made the match and claimed as much, and then he left. It was my last weekend in Labor Day New York before boarding a one-way Milan Alitalia flight where I disembarked with less than 10 bucks to my name and this sense of wonder                                               what would unfold and take me far. It was a blinding day, September, almost still, when Flavio Lucchini came to fetch me. It would be Giangiacomo, Montale, the irascible Nanda, Ettore Sottsass when he was still taking pictures, when he hugged me when he could. In Olga Hirshhorn s obit in the Times,Times no mention of Johanna. Where art thou? Dove? Dove?Dove? Dove? Perhaps she wasn t Joe s daughter after all. Perhaps I d been mistaken, misheard, misremembered. Perhaps she was a long-lost grandchild dangling on that family tree. Perhaps Jim misled me. Perhaps, perhaps my memory is faulty after all, as when I woke to the abrupt jolting of the Rome Express.                  All else is but a blur, a flight from memory, a future without one, far from home.

A roof over my head, protected from the rain, I m reading, pilgrim father, your letters to your son and wondering if, unlike you, I should  head for home. Escaping the turbulence of this modern Rome in a flurry of skyline views and exploding foam, I can see that 747 in flight over Nova Scotia, Lahinch and Limerick, snoring back to the future; I can see the old stormy island from the air, its meteorological gaiety and despair, some evidence of light industry and agriculture, familiar contours, turfsmoke on field and town; I can even hear the cabin crew s soft  f ilte f ilte and the strains of  My Lagan Love  as we touch down. A recovering Ulster Protestant from Co. Down, I shall walk the Dublin lanes as the days grow shorter, I who once had poems in The New Yorker,The New Yorker, and spend old age, if any, in an old mac with the young audibly sneering behind my back, deafened by seagulls and the playground cries of children   ourselves, once   by perilous seas. Now, listening to the rus-in-urbe, spring-in-winter noiserus-in-urbe, of late-night diners while the temperatures rise and the terrible wind-chill factor abates, I realize the daffodils must be out in ditch and glen and windows soon flung wide to the spring rain; and marvel how, a figure out of the past, an old man in a hurry, you stuck it here to the last, negotiating the icefields of 8th Avenue to die on West 29th of the  Asian  flu.        But first you met by chance at the riverside a young woman with a sick child she tried to hide (not out of shame, you felt, but anguished pride), soft-spoken,  from Donnybrook , amid the alien corn. It pained me that her bright image should fade.  It pained me that her bright image should fade.  Thus your epiphany, and you wrote to explain:  The nightingale sings with its breast against a thorn, it s out of pain that personality is born.  Things you understood: children, the human face,  something finer than honesty , the kindness of women and the priority of the real. Things that puzzled you: economy, fear, the argument from design, the need to feel secure, the belief in another world besides this one here. Despite your rationalism, did it ever appear that the universe might be really  magical , sir,really  and you yourself a showing-forth of that soul?  Art is dreamland.  When you rejoined the whole what glimpse was given to you in the black hole? Now, to  Yeats, Artist and Writer , may we add that you were at home here and in human nature but also, in your own words, lived and died like all of us, then as now,  an exile and a stranger ?  

Today my heart is so goddamned fat with grief  that I ve begun hauling it in a wheelbarrow. No. It s an anvil  dragging from my neck as I swim  through choppy waters swollen with the putrid corpses of hippos, which means lurking, somewhere below, is the hungry  snout of a croc waiting to spin me into an oblivion  worse than this run-on simile, which means only to say:  I m sad. And everyone knows what that means.    And in my sadness I ll walk to a caf ,  and not see light in the trees, nor finger the bills in my pocket  as I pass the boarded houses on the block. No,  I will be slogging through the obscure country of my sadness  in all its monotone flourish, and so imagine my surprise  when my self-absorption gets usurped  by the sound of opera streaming from an open window,  and the sun peeks ever-so-slightly from behind his shawl,  and this singing is getting closer, so that I can hear the  delicately rolled r s like a hummingbird fluttering the tongue  which means a language more beautiful than my own,  and I don t recognize the song  though I m jogging toward it and can hear the woman s  breathing through the record s imperfections and above me  two bluebirds dive and dart and a rogue mulberry branch  leaning over an abandoned lot drags itself across my face,  staining it purple and looking, now, like a mad warrior of glee  and relief I run down the street, and I forgot to mention  the fifty or so kids running behind me, some in diapers,  some barefoot, all of them winged and waving their pacifiers  and training wheels and nearly trampling me  when in a doorway I see a woman in slippers and a floral housedress  blowing in the warm breeze who is maybe seventy painting the doorway  and friends, it is not too much to say  it was heaven sailing from her mouth and all the fish in the sea  and giraffe saunter and sugar in my tea and the forgotten angles  of love and every name of the unborn and dead  from this abuelita only glancing at me  before turning back to her earnest work of brushstroke and lullaby  and because we all know the tongue s clumsy thudding  makes of miracles anecdotes let me stop here  and tell you I said thank you.

First snow I release her into it  I know, released, she won't come back. This is different from letting what, already, we count as lost go. It is nothing like that. Also, it is not like wanting to learn what losing a thing we love feels like. Oh yes: I love her. Released, she seems for a moment as if some part of me that, almost, I wouldn't mind understanding better, is that not love? She seems a part of me, and then she seems entirely like what she is: a white dog, less white suddenly, against the snow, who won't come back. I know that; and, knowing it, I release her. It's as if I release herbecause I know.because   

Herodotus says the king made a bowl to leave behind the memory of a number. We don t know the number. We don t know if it was divisible by two or three. I want, at the moment, the number to indicate a ratio, part of a proportion, because the measurement of the earth depends on this, the balance among things, the snow at the bottom of the hill, the gold garage light caged in a tree, my love for my friend and the distance between us, which I can t bear. I made a pinhole camera to demonstrate proportion, and everything bright hovers on its milky eye, and here is the catalogue of what hovers there smaller than itself: the blue horizon and the dash at the stoplight, a shell night-light, the gazing ball of the sun going down against the white back fence, which made it look like night in the woods lit from underneath on the wax. I held these things yesterday, along with two pearls that are spheres hanging from my living room ceiling. My friend is smaller now, and if I held my camera up to her, she would give off enough light to hover pocket-sized in my hand, and grand in the world.

When I got old enough I asked my mother, to her surprise, to tell me what she did with my eyes. She balked and stalled, sounding unsure for the first time I could remember. It was the tender way she held my face and kissed where tears should have rolled that told me I d asked of her the almost impossible  to recount my blinding tale, to tell what became of the rest of me. She took me by the hand and led me to a small sapling that stood not much taller than me. I could smell the green marrow of its promise reaching free of the soil like a song from Earth s royal, dirty mouth. Then Mother told me how she, newly freed, had prayed like a slave through the night when the surgeon took my eyes to save my fevered life, then got off her knees come morning to take the severed parts of me for burial right there beneath that small tree. They fed the roots, climbed through its leaves to soak in sunlight . . . and so, she told me, I can see.can    When the wind rustles up and cools me down, when the earth shakes with footsteps and when the sound of birdcalls stirs forests like the black and white bustling  neath my fingertips I am of the light and shade of my tree. Now, ask me how tall that tree of mine has grown to be after all this time  it touches a place between heaven and here. And I shudder when I hear the earth s wind in my bones through the bones of that boxed-up swarm of wood, bird and bee: I let it loose . . . and beyond me.  

The 3-D printer worked overtime sculpting lemon trees complete with bees on budding flowers. The overheated machine filled the cardboard orchard with the scent of hot plastic. The 12th nightingale arrived like a prophet in a cloud of smoke, considering the same hand that pushed  print  remained destined to strike a single match and wave goodbye to a paradise of paper.    Translated from the PersianTranslated from the PersianTranslated from the PersianTranslated from the Persian

Having desired little more than the arrival of the little more that arrives, outside our window a cypress of model proportions. Its patience seems to widen the nights we sleep in Rome. Warm flags draw a tortoise, it scrapes too near. Our friends hurry over when they hear, exclaiming over its mute resolute distinctness and helpless slow efforts to flee. Density pours into swallows and shadows: spilled with abandon each morning, begins then the slow work of receding. The joints announce their new allegiances. Metaphors swarm the surfaces of things. Night broken into, it's the sub rosa singling out I ought to have expected from Fra Angelico's small panel among others, the souped-up full-spectrum wings combined with a mood of reverent submission in both figures warning of experience yet to come. Starting now she'll reason with herself deliberately (imagine bulbs expecting stars for effort!), aware of being always overheard, subject to unprecedented measures of integrity, like an author. While a substance of landscape, mineral, leaches into blood vessels quietly steadily, meaning in this case nothing is damaged; extravagance of umbrella pines propping their fingers under the bonus horizons of the hills, redundancies boosting the city's resemblance to itself. A painter once squared himself against a difficult question and said no one could just create a landscape, but isn't it true that expectation builds a neighborhood and there is nowhere else that you can live. It was possession, turns out, by a force whose intention touched the first body alone, a body changed again precisely to its own form, a very special intention.   Alloyed discretion, the grit of a damp trowel explores my mouth, at leisure determining the candor that cavity is good for.

We were thirty-one souls all, he said, on the gray-sick of sea in a cold rubber boat, rising and falling in our filth. By morning this didn t matter, no land was in sight, all were soaked to the bone, living and dead. We could still float, we said, from war to war. What lay behind us but ruins of stone piled on ruins of stone? City called  mother of the poor  surrounded by fields of cotton and millet, city of jewelers and cloak-makers, with the oldest church in Christendom and the Sword of Allah. If anyone remains there now, he assures, they would be utterly alone. There is a hotel named for it in Rome two hundred meters from the Piazza di Spagna, where you can have breakfast under the portraits of film stars. There the staff cannot do enough for you. But I am talking nonsense again, as I have since that night we fetched a child, not ours, from the sea, drifting face- down in a life vest, its eyes taken by fish or the birds above us. After that, Aleppo went up in smoke, and Raqqa came under a rain of leaflets warning everyone to go. Leave, yes, but go where? We lived through the Americans and Russians, through Americans again, many nights of death from the clouds, mornings surprised to be waking from the sleep of death, still unburied and alive but with no safe place. Leave, yes, we obey the leaflets, but go where? To the sea to be eaten, to the shores of Europe to be caged? To camp misery and camp remain here. I ask you then, where?camp miserycamp remain You tell me you are a poet. If so, our destination is the same. I find myself now the boatman, driving a taxi at the end of the world. I will see that you arrive safely, my friend, I will get you there.

your black inscriptions cite a kino lau, whose feathered wingspan, nighttime eyes & pun- ishing beak comprise mo ok  auhau. w/my oiled hands, I greet her, w/hun- gering for mo opuna.  mai,  she says, reciting from your thigh.  mai, mai e  ai.  I have traveled from Maui a lizard, mes- merized by dreams of   hi a & ai- k ne, lizard filled w/smoke. arrived, I eat transforming in the forest of your grand- mother s memory: from lizard: woman dreaming: licking tattoo: permission land: skin. traveling the night of your kino to sleep your thighs, ho  o, ho  o, and wake.

When Simone Weil said it would be wrong to think the mystics borrow the language of love for it is theirs by right, though she didn t call it the heavenly song of cock and cunt, perhaps that s the inevitable conclusion of the sacred heart wounded into a womb, an arrow in the hand of an angel piercing such a depth in the body until it s beyond what the body knows, delirious among the lilies or tasting the sweet meats of that table. Yet whoever the mystic woman is, she s not  about  sex; it s not some sexual fantasy that she lies with in the dark mansion of God, sleeping every night in a different room, curling herself to the different shapes of emptiness. It s not some narrative of first he this, then she that, that makes her tremble, being naked and open to nothing but thatnoche oscura, when with love inflamed,noche oscura,  the saint runs out of the house into the hills, for she remains, asleep and dreaming, and in God s innumerable rooms, innumerable forms and shapes of love, she lies down with them all in the depths of her body and blood, until every vision and icon shines with a glimpse of the forgotten and atavistic feminine body, pouring out of her as if out of the nipple of that blue stone embedded in the miraculous hand, as she herself becomes her own threshold; no faces remembered or imagined flicker across the hymen of her mind, for it s not a penis, even God s, that she imagines, but the form of herself, the knowing of the bodyknowing of her own feeling, as in the Old Testament it was said that Jacob knew Rachel or Lot knew his own daughters, the knowing of the body allowed only to men; women, only the known or unknown, as she is known and un- known but as she knows herself as she knows the other that she is not: she enters herself, with fingers  of melting wax, of cold cucumber, with a thumb of glow, with all the abandoned utensils of domestic life, with a stalk from the forsaken garden, and with the lost wing feather of the angel of death and with the voice of a baby s cry nursing on the vestigial milk of the mother of mercy.

I crawl back       he unpacks his tools oils the wooden handles        rinses the metal fragrant       his thighs fragrant his sneer koi & eternity inked on his skin          an ecstatic blue a bewildered green some wounds are ovals some wounds are opals the ears of a white wolf pivot        toward the moon I flee now & then         alone in the desert for months a nomad in a kimono of pressed-together dust beautiful his throat his words         even more beautiful  it s my turn to ask for a bit more from you  he likes it when I bleed         strangers once gently he hammers gold into a sentence       gently the sentence enters me

Under the edge of february in hawk of a throat hidden by ravines of sweet oil by temples of switchblades beautiful in its sound of fertility beautiful in its turban of funeral crepe beautiful in its camouflage of grief in its solitude of bruises in its arson of alert Who will enter its beautiful calligraphy of blood Its beautiful mask of fish net mask of hubcaps mask of ice picks mask of watermelon rinds mask of umbilical cords changing into a mask of rubber bands Who will enter this beautiful beautiful mask of punctured bladders moving with a mask of chapsticks Compound of Hearts   Compound of Hearts Where is the lucky number for this shy love this top-heavy beauty bathed with charcoal water self-conscious against a mosaic of broken bottles broken locks   broken pipes   broken bloods of broken spirits broken through like broken promises Landlords  Junkies  Thieves enthroning themselves in you they burn up couches they burn down houses and infuse themselves against memory every thought a pavement of old belts every performance a ceremonial pickup how many more orphans  how many more neglected shrines how many stolen feet  stolen fingers   stolen watchbands of death in you how many times Harlem   hidden by ravines of sweet oil by temples of switchblades beautiful in your sound of fertility beautiful in your turban of funeral crepe beautiful in your camouflage of grief in your solitude of bruises in your arson of alert beautiful

Mother Dear, never apologize for nettles I yanked in fury from Lottie Shoop s side yard    they stung me into seeing fairy mosses lilypad her middened juniper, the quivering gobble of her chin, teacup clicking dentures as she sprang up into her wattle hut and broke a rib of aloe vera    gel belling the top of that claw goblet. It didn t cool the sting, and yet, noticing sunshine thumbing plums in a string catch-all    I was already well.

In the first taxi he was alone tra-la, No extras on the clock. He tipped ninepence But the cabby, while he thanked him, looked askance As though to suggest someone had bummed a ride. In the second taxi he was alone tra-la But the clock showed sixpence extra; he tipped according And the cabby from out his muffler said:  Make sure You have left nothing behind tra-la between you . In the third taxi he was alone tra-la But the tip-up seats were down and there was an extra Charge of one-and-sixpence and an odd Scent that reminded him of a trip to Cannes. As for the fourth taxi, he was alone Tra-la when he hailed it but the cabby looked Through him and said:  I can t tra-la well take So many people, not to speak of the dog. 

The Twenty-fifth is imminent And every known expedient Designed for making Christmas pay Is getting swiftly under way. Observe the people swarming to And fro, somnambulating through The stores in search of ties and shirts And gloves to give until it hurts. They're eyeing gifts in Saks' and Hearn's  And Macy's, not to mention Stern's, While earnest copywriters are Hitching their copy to the star Of Bethlehem quite shamelessly, For they are duty bound to see That Peace On Earth Good Will To Men Gets adequate results again. 

from Africa to a Caribbean hill             de  frica a las lomas del Caribe to the smiling ruin of our cities             a la feliz ruina de ciudades anoint the neural vessels we refill             al matorral neural en donde vive until your acid muse drowns our pities             tu agria musa que ahoga soledades return us to our tribe that grew dark beans             devu lvenos al semillero isle o cut through the grease of our late-night omelets             metaboliza la grasa nocturna and warm this empty diner by the club             trae tu calor a nuestro desvelo where luckless lovers stare at tiny screens             haz que el amante no muera de sue o and poets brew old socks into psalmlets             tu borra es poema que embadurna while dreaming it rains coffee from above.             y sombr a tu alegr a de cielo.  

         1 The Poet Down          The Poet Down              for Patrick Kavanagh              for Patrick Kavanagh He sits between the doctor and the law. Neither can help. Barbiturate in paw one, whiskey in paw two, a dying man: the poet down, and his fell caravan. They laugh and they mistake the lash that lurks in his tongue for the honey of his works. The poet is at bay, the hounds baying, dig his grave with careful kindness, saying: 'Another whiskey, and make it a large one!' Priests within, acolytes at the margin the red impaled bull's roar must fascinate   they love the dead, the living man they hate. They were designing monuments   in case   and making furtive sketches of his face, and he could hear, above their straining laughs, the rustling foolscap of their epitaphs.         2  The Poet as Mastercraftsman         2  The Poet as Mastercraftsman               for Thomas Kinsella               for Thomas Kinsella Eras do not end when great poets die, for poetry is not whole, it is where man chose mountains to conform, to carve his own face among the Gothic richness and the sky, and the gargoyles, and the lesser tradesmen. Praise from the apprentice is always shown in miniatures of a similar stone. I saw the master in his human guise open doors to let me in, and rhythm out. He smiled and entertained into the night. I was aware of work undone. His eyes, like owls', warned images from the room. Under the stairs the muse was crying; shields clashed in the kitchen and the war drum's boom, men in celtic war dress entered from the right. I left, my conversation put to rout. To poets peace poetry never yields.           3  The Poet as Black SheepThe Poet as Black Sheep             for Paul Durcan             for Paul Durcan I have seen him dine in middle-class surroundings, his manners refined, as his family around him talk about nothing, one of their favourite theses. I have seen him lying between the street and pavement, atoning, dying for their sins, the fittest payment he can make for them, to get drunk and go to pieces. On his father's face in sparse lines etched out by ice, the puritan race has come to its zenith of grey spite, its climax of hate, its essence of frigidity. Let the bourgeoisie beware, who could not control his head and kept it in their care until the brain bled: this head is a poet's head, this head holds a galaxy.         4  The Person as Dreamer: We Talk about the FutureThe Person as Dreamer: We Talk about the Future               for Des Healyfor Des Healy It has to be a hill, high, of course, and twilit. There have to be some birds, all sadly audible: a necessary haze, and small wristlets of rain, yes, and a tremendous  air of satisfaction. Both of us will be old and both our wives, of course, have died, young, and tragic. And all our children have gone their far ways, estranged, or else not begotten. We have been through a war, been hungry, and heroes: and here we are now, calm, fed, and reminiscent. The hills are old, silent: our pipe-smoke rises up. We have come a long way . . . .            5  The Poet Dreams and ResolvesThe Poet Dreams and Resolves                for Macdara Woods                for Macdara Woods To be alone, and not to be lonely, to have time to myself, and not be bored; to live in some suburban house, beside the mountains, with an adequate supply of stout and spirits (or of stout only), and some cigarettes, and writing paper, and a little cheap food, and a small hoard of necessary books, where I could write in dark as monks did, with only blue sky as interference, wind as soul-reaper. But what would I do if on certain nights I was mad in heat for the public lights? I would chain myself to a living tree to foil the Sirens of the distant city.  

               1 That s right, I m talking to you, not him or her.                  2 You have been randomly selected for a security check.   It has nothing to do with you, your physical features, or your name.                  3 Do you now belong or have you ever belonged   to a radical political organization? Do you have weapons training?   Have you ever visited a training camp? Did you pack your own bags?                  4 You people send your sons and daughters on suicide missions.   You animals, you!                  5 If you will please step aside. If you will please remove your shoes.   If you will please come with me. If you will please leave the premises.   If you will please not harm us.                  6 May you live in interesting times.                  7 As Americans, you know exactly what I m talking about.   As Americans, you may be subject to this. As Americans, you should be worried.                  8 Is it you who are to blame?                  9 We cannot help you. There is nothing we can do for you.                  10 The agents came looking for you, at your father s house.                  11 They wanted to ask you questions.                  12 I heard about you being suspected,   detained, interrogated, jailed without charges,   prosecuted with secret evidence, found not guilty.   There s no sense in you making a fuss    they let you go free, didn t they?                  13 Once you begin to see you differently, as separate   from you, wholly other from you,   then you can become like us.                  14 What has history made of you?                  15 Let s get to the point: It was always   like looking in the mirror  that face is you. I am you.

I. I watch them line up, ark-like, two by two, chatting quietly, and after the teacher passes, one pushes, and the one pushed begins the chase. This is how the orphans marched through Warsaw in '42, I tell the behaved ones: orderly and under orders. And I'm about to begin that horrific story, the one they don't yet know, when I pause to open the door for a little air. And there they are again, arms akimbo, like two stooges, the Angel of Death, and the Angel of Forgetfulness, those vaudeville comics, those incorrigible face-making kids, stuck forever you first no you in the undersized doorframe of the museum I will, for lack of a better word, call childhood. II. Did I say Angels? Clearly, I meant my great-aunts whom you haven't yet met. My sister called them From-This-You-Shouldn't-Know From-This-You-Shouldn't-Know  and May-You-Never-Forget. I preferred Horseradish and Charoset,May-You-Never-ForgetHorseradishCharoset that bittersweet matzoh sandwich munched at Pesach between prayers. Everyone I knew was still alive, and no one cared that in Venice, that very summer, Ginsberg, in the name of the Jews, forgave Pound. Hadn't I'd forgone my own bar mitzvah for a weekend in Miami Beach where that borscht-belt-south social director and shuffleboard champ first shticked There's Noah business like Shoah business, soon afterThere's Noah business like Shoah business Lillian Hellman ushered her de-judaicized Anne Frank onto the stage. III. Are you writing another Holocaust poem? my son asks. He's gauging my anger at this interruption a love sonnet, less so? but it takes eight dollars of gas just to get to his summer job. To Hell with the poem, I need me some shekels,To Hell with the poem, I need me some shekels he sings, misquoting both Ravikovitch and Snoop Dogg. Poetry was nowhere in my father's house, or money either, our doorposts marked pass-over; although in a pinch Dad could recite Kipling'spass-over "Gunga Din." Make fun if you must, my mother says, but look in the mirror and I'm here to tell you that your father was a better man than all those anti-Semitic Pounds and Eliots rolled up into one. IV. That was twenty-three years ago, before my mother, cradling his neck and not yet crying, waited, while in East New York, the ambulance raced, and the Angel of Death loitered. Are you comfortable? she asks, adjusting my father's pillow, while he, ever the emcee, mimics Henny Youngman's I make a living. Poetry makes nothing happen, Auden might repeat, were he here, and what wouldn't I give, at this moment, for his stiff British upper lip. What's one more death in the family, Otto Frank argues, expunging not grief but sex from his daughter's diary, and what parent today would dare to play jury or judge. V. Are you writing another Holocaust poem? the Angel of Consciousness, who sits, while I muse, on my right shoulder and whom I often confuse with her errant two-headed twin, the Angel of Conscience, asks. And now I'm recalling my home office, the Akeidah above the desk,Akeidah the knife blade drawn downward, that Angel, what's her name, restraining Abraham's implausibly blood-stained arm. And because I, exiled to the basement when my Isaac arrived, overlooked that drawing, it hung ten months above my newborn son's head.I feel wicked sleeping in this warm bed, my daughter proclaims,I feel wicked sleeping in this warm bed rehearsing her Anne Frank and pausing anxiously for applause. VI.Burn everything after I'm dead, Kafka said, poking his prewarBurn everything after I'm dead Jewish head into yet one more of my poems. He's trying to explain the fatherland to the fatherless. No one reads poetry anymore, anyway, my mother, quoting from her own unpublished diary, writes. And whoAnd who doesn't want to go on living even after death? my daughter recites. I'm at my desk, buried again in this moldy basement, begging for quiet, while upstairs I can hear my great-uncles Abbott and Costello arguing, and now they're chasing each other around the kitchen like Keystone Cops, and now they're singing each other's praises like Eliot and Pound, and now they're comforting each other like the Angels of Death and Forgetfulness. VII. Quiet, I call out; castigating the offenders brought back buddy-style  heads bowed and hand in hand; two pretty preteens caught hiding behind stacks of spectacles, confiscated suitcases, and desecrated scrolls. I want to face them toward this tearful Tower of Faces and teach themTower of Faces proper museum protocol. But they are still unapologetic, giggling, and trading one-liners, these entertaining angels in training. I'd planned to quote Kafka or even Kipling, but it's clear I've lost control and now I can't recall a single thing I came here to say. I am simply a young girlI am simply a young girl badly in need of some rollicking fun, Anne whispers as I open the door for a little air, letting her play, at least for today, out in the sun.

Our mascot was the bulldog. Bulldogs chased me across playgrounds until I dreamed them. In class, I finished mazes with a green crayon. Hedges grew skyward from pages, and I ran. My dad once called this kind of thing my day-head. When my day-head happened, they called him at his office. I learned the name Daedalus from an articleDaedalus I read for science class. It meant a plane with leg-powered wings    carbon tubing, plastic skin. A man with a long name flew a longer way across the sea from Crete. At recess, I reread the same book of illustrated myths and cryptids. I dreamed of bulldogs with bulls  heads. My day-head was a zoo where gods slept. Daedalus sounded like dad,Daedalusdad so I loved him. Class was an enclosure made of cinder block and twelve weeks without winter. Behind the glass, my day-head paced. Daedalus was a zookeeper. I dreamed of a god with a bull s body and a hood sewn from my face. The article said I weighed the same as the Daedalus. I traced flight plans and crash sites on my desk.Daedalus My teacher asked us to draw self-portraits. The trees were hydras. On the paper, I drew an outline of my face. I cut my eyes out with scissors. They called me to the office, and Daedalus was waiting. I found a bulldog in a magazine and drew a maze inside each iris. We played tug-of-war in gym. My day-head was a knotted rope dangling from steel rafters. I pushed my thumb into the sun. I fell once. I cut the bulldog from the page, then ripped his head in two. I glued one half over the left side of my face. I left the right side blank. The article said the Daedalus crashed twenty-one feet from the black sandDaedalus of a beach on Santorini. My day-head was a Kevlar fuselage belly-down in the sea. They called home. I ran home. On the right side of my face, I drew a sunny day. I signed my name.

The wrong words sit beside us Where the flesh is heavy. The right words come most easily To those who sleep. I put my boots in a CVS bag Because the weather demanded it And my jacket over The windshield in the morning To confuse the sun. Of mine own life, I'll tell you One thing the internet Won't tell you I wear my hair Like a woman sometimes. The project of the snow's To put the sky in lo-fi And the memory of last week's Snow's a gash in the air. The mountains and seas Have a queer look about them. A hoax of golden daffodils Obscures them, you might say. I've been told We should pretend That everything we see is real, That images should try As best they can To come to life. I feel that iron Should take the place of snow In the literature And that silk flowers Should be manufactured like Real ones each spring. I'm reading the letters Of distinguished men to you. A broadside of a bad poem On very good paper. A treatise on how to infuse Brandy with plums. My fat ass Surveys the greensward And when I step In the manner befitting a person Of little station in the world The dandelions seem to Vanish in retrospect As though to die were just To overlook the rituals That accompany The death and life of weeds And to fold oneself Back into one's roots. I am so big I mean my ass is so big I can't fit in this room I'm building. My ass can barely fit Without assistance Through the door of this stanza Which is why I invented The pronoun "you." The streetlamps Seemed to you to want to Break apart the clouds So we left the city, are always In the process Of abandoning a city Somewhere. Some days now You'll find us trolling The hillsides for wildflowers. Other times, sitting at the very center Of our garden, googling "beauty" With the filter off.

from           the 4        corners       of this tower      lumped on a map the     best     magician   wins   the        day  /        thinks he s invisible     /          white rabbits           hide       in        cupboards in          boxes        in      hats  /      a peaceful contradiction       exists  / a   plan    for    a    park    a plantation for immaculate thoughts  for    flower beds     which    eat    fragrances         all  year round  / from    this  monolithic  inheritance       avenues           spoke outwards to         capture             returning prodigals  /    ancestral dropouts  /              the            multiple   births               of          children the             sun s               last    sentence       of            the             day

He slips on ice near a mailbox    no gemsbok leaps across the road    a singer tapped an eagle feather on his shoulders    women washed indigo-dyed yarn in this river, but today gallium and germanium particles are washed downstream    once they dynamited dikes to slow advancing troops    picking psilocybin mushrooms and hearing cowbells in the mist    as a child, he was tied to a sheep and escaped marauding soldiers    an apple blossom opens to five petals    as he hikes up a switchback, he remembers undressing her    from the train window, he saw they were on ladders cutting fruit off cacti    in the desert, a crater of radioactive glass    assembling shards, he starts to repair a gray bowl with gold lacquer    they ate psilocybin mushrooms, gazed at the pond, undressed    hunting a turkey in the brush, he stops    from the ponderosa pines: whoo-ah, whoo whoo whoo   whoo-ah, whoo whoo whoo

When you step through the back door into the kitchen father is still sitting at the table with a newspaper folded open in front of him and pen raised, working the crossword puzzle. In the living room mother is sleeping her peaceful sleep at last, in a purple robe, with her head back, slippered feet up and twisted knuckle hands crossed right over left in her lap. Through the south window in your old room you see leaves on the giant ash tree turning yellow again in setting sun and falling slowly to the ground and one by one all the questions you ever had become clear. Number one across: a four-letter word for no longer. Number one down: an eleven letter word for gone.

This is for the Pullman Porters who organized when people said
they couldn t. And carried the Pittsburgh Courier and the ChicagoDefender to the Black Americans in the South so they would
know they were not alone. This is for the Pullman Porters who
helped Thurgood Marshall go south and come back north to fight
the fight that resulted in Brown v. Board of Education because
even though Kansas is west and even though Topeka is the birth-Pittsburgh Courier ChicagoDefender Brown v. Board of Education place of Gwendolyn Brooks, who wrote the powerful  The
Chicago Defender Sends a Man to Little Rock,  it was the
Pullman Porters who whispered to the traveling men both
the Blues Men and the  Race  Men so that they both would
know what was going on. This is for the Pullman Porters who
smiled as if they were happy and laughed like they were tickled
when some folks were around and who silently rejoiced in 1954
when the Supreme Court announced its 9 0 decision that  sepa-
rate is inherently unequal.  This is for the Pullman Porters who
smiled and welcomed a fourteen-year-old boy onto their train in
1955. They noticed his slight limp that he tried to disguise with a
doo-wop walk; they noticed his stutter and probably understood
why his mother wanted him out of Chicago during the summer
when school was out. Fourteen-year-old Black boys with limps
and stutters are apt to try to prove themselves in dangerous ways
when mothers aren t around to look after them. So this is for the
Pullman Porters who looked over that fourteen-year-old while
the train rolled the reverse of the Blues Highway from Chicago to
St. Louis to Memphis to Mississippi. This is for the men who kept
him safe; and if Emmett Till had been able to stay on a train all
summer he would have maybe grown a bit of a paunch, certainly
lost his hair, probably have worn bifocals and bounced his grand-
children on his knee telling them about his summer riding the
rails. But he had to get off the train. And ended up in Money,
Mississippi. And was horribly, brutally, inexcusably, and unac-
ceptably murdered. This is for the Pullman Porters who, when the
sheriff was trying to get the body secretly buried, got Emmett s
body on the northbound train, got his body home to Chicago,
where his mother said: I want the world to see what they did
to my boy. And this is for all the mothers who cried. And this is
for all the people who said Never Again. And this is about Rosa
Parks whose feet were not so tired, it had been, after all, an ordi-
nary day, until the bus driver gave her the opportunity to make
history. This is about Mrs. Rosa Parks from Tuskegee, Alabama,
who was also the field secretary of the NAACP. This is about the
moment Rosa Parks shouldered her cross, put her worldly goods
aside, was willing to sacrifice her life, so that that young man in
Money, Mississippi, who had been so well protected by the
Pullman Porters, would not have died in vain. When Mrs. Parks
said  NO  a passionate movement was begun. No longer would
there be a reliance on the law; there was a higher law. When Mrs.
Parks brought that light of hers to expose the evil of the system,
the sun came and rested on her shoulders bringing the heat and
the light of truth. Others would follow Mrs. Parks. Four young
men in Greensboro, North Carolina, would also say No. Great
voices would be raised singing the praises of God and exhorting
us  to forgive those who trespass against us.  But it was the
Pullman Porters who safely got Emmett to his granduncle and it
was Mrs. Rosa Parks who could not stand that death. And in not
being able to stand it. She sat back down.Defender 

Ms. Nafis underwent a repeat pelvic ultrasound todayMs. Nafis underwent a repeat pelvic ultrasound today the final report is not available Preliminary reports suggest a normal right ovary The left is enlarged and contains 2 separate complex cysts one measuring 3.6 centimeters the second measuring 1.8 centimeters B   Black or African-American      Angel, most loyal blood. Keep-a-promise, grow-an-imperfect-garden-blood. Angel, devoted. Angel, faithful runes of wine and cardinal. Angel, blank-old-blood, protein stitched to oxygen. Obstacle course blood, goddamn know-it-all hand-me-down.     Family History:Family History: Mother deceased at the age of 36 Breast cancer diagnosed at the age of 33 Sister has lupus There are no other known At the time of surgery, she had a normal-appearing uterus but it was minimally mobile The posterior cul-de-sac was obliterated with extensive adhesions      Angel, 102-degree fever. Angel, long-gone lavender in a dirty-water vase. Angel don t touch me here or there or there. Can you smell me? Angel unspooled yards of fabric. Yards and yards of unusable fabric. Everything has hands, a mouth, everything reaches across time and tissue.     The ovaries were kissingThe ovaries were kissing The ovaries were not identified at the initial point of the procedure, but after extensive lysis they were revealed and noted The left fallopian tube significantly dilated and tortuous      Angel, can t you be a good thing? Angel, on time. Clean scan, Angel.     The right ovary also mildlyThe right ovary also mildly but not significantly There was a window in the left posterior adhesions of the bladder to the uterus Scattered pigmented lesions on the pelvic sidewall above the pelvic brim      Angel bowled over like a promise. Angel howling, adhered to a ribbon of prayer. Angel, splayed like a galaxy. Angel, viscera smooth and glistening. Angel, dilated like a cashed check.     After obtaining informed consent the patient was takenAfter obtaining informed consent the patient was taken to the operating room She had been placed on foam pads to prevent slippage while in the Trendelenburg position Arms tucked at her sides Legs supported in Yellofins stirrups The cervix grasped with a single-tooth      Angel, colon distended, pelvis soaked in saline. Angel obliterated melon. Fastened to a dark star. Lacerated like a web. Tender witch, misunderstood by the tide s swift grip. Ms. Nafis mortal as a rose. Nobody s mama.

It is Monday, I am twelve years old, summer still feel like summer to me...                                            Ernest Green My elementary school principal was white I only had one white teacher, she was named after the juice the astronauts took into space, Tang, I got some Tang at home...did you hear about the little girls who got killed while we was in Sunday School yesterday?                                           Elizabeth Eckford I live in Baltimore and so do you, your people the raw and stinky crew, my daddy a big shot on the Avenue your daddy can't buy a pair of shoes...                                           Jefferson Thomas One little girl was named Addie Mae, just liek my aunt from South Carolina, and when I come home from church everybody was cryin about the news from Alabama...I know Alabama Alabama was on the math test today                               If you going 65 miles an hour leaving                              Richmond near where my cousin live                              and you drive for twelve hours straight                              will get you to Alabama? hell no, cause                              Alabama in hell ...                                           Terrance Roberts The bus is hot, the white neighborhood full of angry faces just two miles from where we live, angry faces I see at night when I look out the window and wonder why I have to sit next to white children to be smart...I was smart all the time, my mama told me so when I did things the right way, extra things, good things, smart is knowin when somethin's missing...                                           Carlotta Walls LaNier I like Malcom X because he looks like me when I am so mad I can't stand myself, when my cousins take my model car shelf down, break up my cats and then dare me to fight, when I have to walk from the white school home through the white neighborhood when I miss the bus or when I get a beatin for what my friend did and he get a beatin, too, but mine hurt more because he did it, not me, so I like Malcom X. He so mean, Mr. Green, he so mean...you got to be mean in Chicago...                                           Minnijean Brown When I was fourteen a boy kissed me when we were walking to the movies, he sneaked me, and I tried not to smile because kissing is a sin and all the while I was so full of hallelujah on the inside, on the way to the movies we go to now because somebody made a way somehow, standing in lines with protest signs, dogs barking all around, so I make sure I sound educated when Henry sneaks to kiss me on the way to the movies...we have all kinds of movies in Philadelphia...                                           Gloria Ray Karlmark New York is faster than yesterday, been here and gone before you remember it ain't here no more, we go downtown in the middle of tomorrow when it still be today, New York is faster than yesterday, I got a quarter for your ten dollar bill, give it to me I'll pay your cleaners bill because New York is faster than yesterday, and a high school diploma is all a genius like me will ever need in a city where a thrill is more to me if you will believe me...and believe me you will...                                           Thelma Mothershed What a word will do, my momma used to say at night when her work was done, rearing back in that chair of hers with the stuffin fallin out of the arms, what a word will do when you know what words are for, she would say, layin her head back, closing her eyes and settling down inside some dream. She never told us her dreams when we asked her, she just said we would know when the moon turned over three times and ghosts rose up out of the sea. Mama was half out of this world, in California we all the way in it...                                           Melba Patillo Beals               Little Rock Nine,               Shaking the line               Between white no               And black oh yes,               I'll walk all over               What is mine, thanks               To Little Rock Nine.    

How do you feel about me Now that you've learned to know me? Why don't we both admit That something is happening. And we would feel better if We'd just tell each other No need to keep it to ourselves. Let's put it to music Let's put it to music Let's sing about it Laugh about it Clap our hands And shout about it Let the whole world hear it In a sweet, sweet melody Let's put it to music, you and me.

And then when you stand where it is quiet so that you notice when thought ends and listening begins when listening ends and seeing begins when a bird flies when you glide as a black bird and scream when you start to speak in the clear air and can speak of nothing but the light as if it were the first light when you cast a shadow on the rock and say my shadow stays and the rock passes away when at this moment it is true that it is good to attempt the entire mission you can call the desert by its name    Translated from the GermanTranslated from the GermanTranslated from the German

Beauty=Nation Ugly=Nation Ladies Garden in Progress The American Visitors The New American Word The Beauty of Publicity Mother s Mop Head Ring spots Sway Me Yes, Ma am Gossamer=Blouse Yankee=Blouse Yes, Ma am Sway Me Father, nice to see you Major, it s been a hell of a ride General M & General H Mother s Mop Head I see ring spotsThat s a good sight for my old eyes Yes, Ma am Ray-Ban Sunglasses So Sway Me Sway Me Oh Sway Me 1. Parade of the Japanese Colonial Government s Monitors 2. Parade of the First Republic s ROK Monitors 3. Parade of the DPRK Communist Monitors 4. Parade of the Joint ROK-UN Forces Monitors Yes, Ma am Did I tell you I saw corpses piled up inside the well in Pyongyang? Did I tell you I helped the Communist Monitor who was also a Colonial Monitor, ROK Monitor, then later an ROK-UN Monitor drag the corpse of his brother? Monitor=For Life! General=For Life! President=For Life! However, I see buttons and ring spots Father, Hiroshima and Nagasaki Major, snap out of it. It s August 15, 1948 He s smiling at me Fun Hydrangeas Gossamer=Blouse and Yankee=Blouse Warmly greeted one another I see Ugly=Translators Yes, Ma am Me=Gook  Beauty=Nation Ugly=Nation Ladies Garden in Progress The American Visitors The New American Word The Beauty of Publicity Mother s Mop Head Ring spots Sway Me Yes, Ma am Gossamer=Blouse Yankee=Blouse Yes, Ma am Sway Me Father, nice to see you Major, it s been a hell of a ride General M & General H Mother s Mop Head I see ring spotsThat s a good sight for my old eyes Yes, Ma am Ray-Ban Sunglasses So Sway Me Sway Me Oh Sway Me 1. Parade of the Japanese Colonial Government s Monitors 2. Parade of the First Republic s ROK Monitors 3. Parade of the DPRK Communist Monitors 4. Parade of the Joint ROK-UN Forces Monitors Yes, Ma am Did I tell you I saw corpses piled up inside the well in Pyongyang? Did I tell you I helped the Communist Monitor who was also a Colonial Monitor, ROK Monitor, then later an ROK-UN Monitor drag the corpse of his brother? Monitor=For Life! General=For Life! President=For Life! However, I see buttons and ring spots Father, Hiroshima and Nagasaki Major, snap out of it. It s August 15, 1948 He s smiling at me Fun Hydrangeas Gossamer=Blouse and Yankee=Blouse Warmly greeted one another I see Ugly=Translators Yes, Ma am Me=Gook  Ugly=Nation Ladies Garden in Progress The American Visitors The New American Word The Beauty of Publicity Mother s Mop Head Ring spots Sway Me Yes, Ma am Gossamer=Blouse Yankee=Blouse Yes, Ma am Sway Me Father, nice to see you Major, it s been a hell of a ride General M & General H Mother s Mop Head I see ring spotsThat s a good sight for my old eyes Yes, Ma am Ray-Ban Sunglasses So Sway Me Sway Me Oh Sway Me 1. Parade of the Japanese Colonial Government s Monitors 2. Parade of the First Republic s ROK Monitors 3. Parade of the DPRK Communist Monitors 4. Parade of the Joint ROK-UN Forces Monitors Yes, Ma am Did I tell you I saw corpses piled up inside the well in Pyongyang? Did I tell you I helped the Communist Monitor who was also a Colonial Monitor, ROK Monitor, then later an ROK-UN Monitor drag the corpse of his brother? Monitor=For Life! General=For Life! President=For Life! However, I see buttons and ring spots Father, Hiroshima and Nagasaki Major, snap out of it. It s August 15, 1948 He s smiling at me Fun Hydrangeas Gossamer=Blouse and Yankee=Blouse Warmly greeted one another I see Ugly=Translators Yes, Ma am Me=Gook Ladies Garden in Progress The American Visitors The New American Word The Beauty of Publicity Mother s Mop Head Ring spots Sway Me Yes, Ma am Gossamer=Blouse Yankee=Blouse Yes, Ma am Sway Me Father, nice to see you Major, it s been a hell of a ride General M & General H Mother s Mop Head I see ring spotsThat s a good sight for my old eyesThat s a good sight for my old eyes Yes, Ma am Ray-Ban Sunglasses So Sway Me Sway Me Oh Sway Me 1. Parade of the Japanese Colonial Government s Monitors 2. Parade of the First Republic s ROK Monitors 3. Parade of the DPRK Communist Monitors 4. Parade of the Joint ROK-UN Forces Monitors Yes, Ma am Did I tell you I saw corpses piled up inside the well in Pyongyang? Did I tell you I helped the Communist Monitor who was also a Colonial Monitor, ROK Monitor, then later an ROK-UN Monitor drag the corpse of his brother? Monitor=For Life! General=For Life! President=For Life! However, I see buttons and ring spots Father, Hiroshima and Nagasaki Major, snap out of it. It s August 15, 1948 He s smiling at me Fun Hydrangeas Gossamer=Blouse and Yankee=Blouse Warmly greeted one another I see Ugly=Translators Yes, Ma am Me=Gook

I finally find the witch. She is branch- boned, old, with knowing fingers. She says nothing. Walks me to a tall tree, a gourd hanging from a long line of jute. She pulls out a phone, asks me to type a note to my family. I do it, but can t see how it can be sent from somewhere so deep. She scolds me, says that only tourists think the world can be escaped. The jungle s green is the wild mind of God. The witch puts the phone into the gourd. Hand-over-hand, she raises this cradle to the top of the holy canopy.

The spirits have dispersed, the woods faded to grey from midnight blue leaving a powdery residue, night music fainter, frivolous gods withdrawing, cries of yin and yang, discords of the bionic young; cobweb and insects, hares and deer, wild strawberries and eglantine, dawn silence of the biosphere, amid the branches a torn wing   what is this enchanted place? Not the strict groves of academe but an old thicket of lost time too cool for school, recovered space where the brain yields to nose and ear, folk remedy and herbal cure, old narratives of heart and hand, and a dazed donkey, starry eyed, with pearls and honeysuckle crowned, beside her naked nibs is laid. Wild viruses, Elysian fields   our own planet lit by the fire of molten substance, constant flux, hot ice and acrobatic sex, the electric moth-touch of desire and a new vision, a new regime where the white blaze of physics yields to yellow moonlight, dance and dream induced by what mind-altering drug or rough-cast magic realism; till morning bright with ant and bug shines in a mist of glistening gism, shifting identities, mutant forms, angels evolved from snails and worms.  

ididTwo ids walk into one body & fight over whether to break melon on the kitchen counter & eat it by the fistful or to throw the melon out a shut window & watch it break on the pavement, stabbed by shards of glass.egoegoSorry, for yelling through the speaker at the McDonald s drive thru. Sorry, for not letting you through the door first. Sorry, I ate the dozen donuts in fifteen minutes over the sink. Sorry, I sound shrill, sound dumb, sound ditzy, sound spacey. Sorry, mom. I mean, mam .  I mean, miss. I mean, nevermind.superegosuperegoDear body: Cut the melon into slices with the sharpest knife you can find & enjoy the pain you are causing this melon. Stop saying you re sorry, instead feel guilty for being shrill, being dumb, being ditzy,  being spacey. Feel guilty because your mom is your mam  is your miss is the one who is guilty for giving you this body with two ids,  & one ego, & one superego who hush-hushes you whole.

This is a day when I covered no ground. Just pushed and shuffled my papers around, Nudged at letters and winced at bills, Sorting them out into different hills, Hunted fretfully for a ruler, Worried the overworked water cooler, Sharpened pencils and filled my pen, Then shuffled my papers around again.

Word of it comes whispered by a slippery thin section of the paper, where the models pantomime unruffled t te- -t tes despite the absence of their blouses.   Each year when my familiar latches on them so intently like a grand master plotting the white queen s path, like a baby trying to suckle a whole roast beef,   I ask: What, you salt block, are you dreaming about being clubbed by thunderheads? but he will not say. Meanwhile Capricorn s dark hours flabbed me,   uneasy about surrendering to the expert fitterexpert fitter (even if the cupped hands were licensed and bonded)  I had August in mind, seeing the pygmy goats at the county fair.   Now the sky is having its daily rain event and the trees are having their hibernal bark event, pretending they feel unruffled   despite the absence of their leaves. And we forget how they looked all flouncy and green. Instead we regard fearfully the sway of their old trunks.  

Radiant dog on doublecross, and I, by night, a raven fly. My fear is that eternity has an alm that is ordinary to ten thousand and worn from my strings, my console of limbs, and I a missing part. It is the world that's new, not I, and submarines can shoot the land from the wheelbarrow of sickly pastorals. Give me the swamp any day! or the huts that pave the slave to freedom. From a small cloud in my ears the song has leapt the valley curtained with snow, and for ascendant harmony the gambler thumbs his cards. Of all the queens one is a witch whose curse is that she's held. The horses roll the stone and trot after their maturity sweepstakes. This time the homeliest won't ride my bet into hasty subtract glue. The pieces fly and here I lie, triangle of head and gut and thigh. Put me on my mount, Tomahawk, and past the river our cortege will dust the heavy fur, and peasants' prayers will touch the smell of holy cadaver. I will have sun and manly rage, and Mike Atlas will trim me up to rip the bier from my brother's hearse, and avenge me for my loss. The gallows hurt! and for my scheme I hang on the bridge's span where my mother will trust my lips with tears, the ones I send her now.

The mother says, I am afraid. The daughter says, I am afraid.   The mother says, My feet are cold. The daughter says, My feet are cold.   The mother says, The car is sinking. The daughter says Yes, the car is sinking.   The mother says, The water is heavy, and the daughter says, The water is very heavy.   The mother says, I am too young for this. The daughter says, I want to grow old.   The mother says, I can see the sky, and the daughter says, I can also see the sky.   How about the moon, the mother says, and the daughter says, I can see the moon.   What else hurts you, the mother says and the daughter says, What about you.   I forgot to tell your father something, the mother says and the daughter says, I forgot to tell my father something.   The mother says, I do not want to die. I do not want to die, the daughter says.   I wanted to be a good mother, the mother says. Sometimes you weren t, the daughter says.   Sometimes you weren t a good daughter either, the mother says and the daughter says, I wanted to be good.   I can hear my heart, she says. I can hear my heart, she says.   I wish I loved Jesus, she says and she says, I wish I loved Jesus.   She says, The thud is unbearable. She says, The thud is unbearable.   What do you mean you wish you loved Jesus, she says and she says, The water is dark.   My clothes are getting heavier, she says. Heavier, she says, and heavier.   She says, The water is up to my chin now, and she says, It is up to my chin too.   What if this is the last thing I say to you, she says and she says, What if this is the last thing I say to you.   She says, I cannot hold on much longer. Please, she says, hold on longer.   The water is at my mouth, she says, and she says, Even if it is at your mouth.

He never saw a violin. But he saw a lifetime of violence. This is not to presume That if he had simply seen A violin he would have seen Less violence. Or that living among Violins, as though they were Boulangeries or toppling stacks Of other glazed goods like young adult Fiction, would have made the violence Less crack and more cocaine, Less of course and more why god oh why. More of one thing Doesn t rhyme with one thing. A swill of stars doesn t rhyme With star. A posse of poets doesn t rhyme With poet. We are all in prison. This is the brutal lesson of the 21st century, Swilled like a sour stone Through the vein of the beast Who watches you while you eat; Our eternal host, the chummed fiddler, The better tomorrow, MMXVI.

.            .             .          .            . Before the astronomer's table a circle with a demon inside demons with wings of a bat (Before the astronomer's table) overhead like an armada of ships .            .             .          .            . Time of the weed, time of bramble along the bank of a canal muddy with old newspaper close-held surface to write on to dance as with desire black letters where roads meet .            .             .          .            . Tonight in the city, only the chains make soft noises like bells only the dogs are awake the fences lean over to scrape their elbows on stone and broken glass  

 Slight whiff of toner, or is it White-Out?              Brief heat of manuscript                            lifted from the printer, against my face.   What is it about the new hire              that has everybody talking?                            Her newness, perhaps, her  clat   cutting through              each of us, like a sword                            through wet bamboo; it s a graceful   violation. And then the water              breaks, and then a darkening                            sky rolls over the lake, and then   a meeting is called to introduce her,              to make her understand,                            to allow her to share in our delights!   Here is the coffee machine, there are the filters.              You may store your lunch                            in the communal refrigerator, but please   remember to empty yourself,              all of you. Feel free to decorate                            your cubicle with pictures, tack up a view   of the lake behind you              to remind you of the lake                            behind you. Don t listen to those of us   who are certain              of the small death                            each photo you tack up represents.             Familiarity breeds              intent, intent signals purpose,                            purpose is a proposition you make to those             who observe, quantify              and assess you; and use as many legal                            pads as you like. And the retractable pencils,   they re all yours. Marigolds.              Sunflowers. Black-Eyed Susans. Just keep it                            yellow. Paper cuts will happen. Band-Aids   are in the top left drawer              in the kitchen,                            next to the cake-cutting knife   we pull out for anniversaries, birthdays,              retirements, record days,                            or the first time you see all of us converge   on the conference room, leaving you alone in your cube. 

I lied when Pops asked, but I ll admit it now. I did touch the blue egg to see if, somehow, it felt as much like the sky as it looked. The egg: speckled in its twiggy nest, eye level to 8-year-olds, perfect & off-limits like the Baoding balls on Pops  desk. We tried to find its mom, but the finches scattered when we came near. One twittered the alarm from a maple. Others balanced on wires, flapped wings at us like we were gravity. I can still see how carefully Garrett scooped the egg from the nest, then headed out to find a spot on the March concrete to drop it. I want to see if these things break into pieces or inI want to see if these things break into pieces or in half like on TV. Always the follower, I followed him through the maples out into the treeless street, my stomach dropping before the egg did. A crunch, then no more noise.

In inaccurate skin, among hologram trees, fresh from the tundra of dreams, I hear public television say that Jesus was trilingual. Billie Holiday sings the loss of plotliness, the loss of onomatopoeiabreath. Doris asks if I ll touch her titanium humerus I do. I go to Sheboygan to stand in Emery Blagdon's "The Healing                                                                 Machine," which was brought in                                                                     pieces from the Nebraska Plains. Its coffee can klieg lights' grace                                                                        and copper wire sculptures                                                                           leave burns all over me.       Death is like Russia:                                                                                         beautiful, cold, expansive,                                                                            expensive. Ephesus says:                                                                              even marble turns to chalk.                                                                           Aldebaran is nearing                                                                                  the end of its life.                                                                                         Jupiter and the moon are                                                                               the closest they'll be until 2026.                                                                    It's 25-below wind chill. Winds                                                                     push iced piers into houses.                                                                                My wounds smell like strawberries.                                                                  Jim who once saw a UFO  and was too tired to tell anyone, who rode a tiger, and                                                                             slept with his cornet's mouthpiece stenciled on his lips, was a lifelong Indiana water garden gang member, Jim who delivered a baby from my body, Jim, impresario of poems, parking tickets, and sky-blue hydrangeas, Jim who "wore a crown of snow," Jim's ashes change the garden. Who can sleep with banded Jupiter so close to the moon?

In the evenings of my childhood, when I went to bed, music washed into the cove of my room, my door open to a slice of light. I felt a melancholy I couldn't have named, a longing for what I couldn't yet have said or understood but still knew was longing, knew was sadness untouched by time. Sometimes the music was a rippling stream of clear water rushing over a bed of river stones caught in sunlight. And many nights I crept from bed to watch her swaying where she sat overtaken by the tide, her arms rowing the music out of the piano. 

She longed to be an island, She loved the unbridled madness of them, the islands, She longed to arrive to an island that, perhaps, wasn't an island Divest herself of the ruinous, stony loves She longed to be an island To only inhabit the sea's waistline And not leave or return To only be an island Island of the night Island of the dawn Islands.

The workaround or aura Not like repetition   When we get to the final sun The maps are water the water gold   He would not honor me You explain then against   The disbelief displayed by the character I couldn t know him   But knew love and Know it through knowledge    Love never falls off whether prophecies will be abolished whether tongues stopped    Announced as the fact Redolent of what was   The defining addition More than the parts   Unprecedented Ardor also not   Adding up to Sun or son to sum   The outcome Unknowable   Perfect and Unavowed   The same sound Unknown sum  

A tang approaches, like the smell of snow. Illness like a color deepens  pale gray, thick-in-a-cloak gray, secret coat silk, and finally the weight of rough pelts heaped on the bed.   The last enchantment of the day is tearing pages out of a book. The paper soft and thin, like falling asleep (a hand backstage smoothing my hair: the school friend, Lakamp, became an undertaker)   My baby laughs to rip the pages. Stays by me, does this damage. The tearing moves like voltage through my own hands.                 Oh mother skimming fever               Oh mother skimming fever   I need him to linger                 are you still happening there, in your body?               are you still happening there, in your body?   I just want to lie at the edge of breaking.   Yes, I am still backstage, here in my body. The baby pulls out another page  leaving him would come this easily.   I will bind myself to the thinnest sounds, the feather coming out of the pillow.   Please keep ripping up the words. Please don t need anything from me.  

24.
Zachary talks about wanting to be with someone because he
feels like he can be a better person for someone else. He says he
doesn't know what he's doing, wishes he had someone to do
things for. I tell him I think we are very different people.
Theory as pure verbalism: a generated knowledge with
negative impact.
If I begin to miss someone,  I think, "Life is bad anyway."

It would be winter, with a thin snow. An aged sunbeam would fall on me, then on a nearby summit, until a mass of ice would come upon me like a crown of master diamonds in shades of gold and pink. The base of the mountains would be still in darkness. The snow would melt, making the mountain uglier. The ice would undertake a journey toward dying. My iliacus, from which orchids bloom, would learn to take an infant s shape, some premature creature weaned too soon. My femoral nerve, from which lichen grows in many shades, would learn to take breaths of its own and would issue a moan so labored it could have issued from two women carrying a full-length wooden casket, with dirt made from a girl inside. The dirt would have been buried with all of the girl s celestial possessions. Bearing the casket would demand more muscles than earthbound horses have. The girl would have been twenty-four. This was my visio.visio Sometimes I think of it as prophecy. Other times, history. For years it was akin to some specific land, with a vessel that would come for me, able to cross land, sea, the spaces of the universe, able to burrow deep into the ground. Anything could summon it   a breaking in cloud cover, wind chimes catching salt outside my mother s window, a corner of a painting. And I learned how to call it, too. This is the only skill of which I have ever been proud. When my sister died, from the head of my visio came offspring in the thousands, armed to the teeth, each its own vessel. My first, their mother, lived on. For itself and its hoard it found a permanent home in a cave at the bottom of a lake. And it waited until I was standing on a mountain to sing to me:You will call this mountain home until I tell you to move again.You will call this mountain home until I tell you to move again. There will always be more of it underground than youwill ever see with your eye. And so it turned out to be true.will ever see with your eye And so when I stood on the mountain that became my home, I beheld a dirt sea, and saw our moon, which has two faces. I learned that one face of our moon is dappled with maria, and that the sunbeams here are newborns that lie on each other, purpling into the fog and outstretched pines. The Earth spins masses of air until it looks like one of many irises studding our galaxy. From space, parts of the Atlantic look like leather, wrinkled and dark, and others look like iridescent fishes in an old Master s painting of the sky. I live in the valley of a crater here, where steam rises like ghosts in the summer heat. This mountain is made of igneous stone. Every day I issue a warning to lovers: darlings, I have in my possession a dead girl deer. Her head is draped over my right shoulder. I hold her with one arm encircling her torso. You wake each morning with flowers shrouding your body, like a corpse; I put them there. To me, you died when my legs curved around your head. One of the deer s eyes has blackened, and her tongue is thick. She belonged to my sister. O my sister, you were twenty-four. Listen close. Even to this part. Especially this. I want you to hear what I say to lovers, because I want to sing to you, who died a virgin, a few treatises on love and sex    how flesh and ecstasy are born, what they make, how they live out their days. As a bodied girl you feared me, and I met your fear with guttural disdain. I imagine you wondered what it would take for me to hear a mortal, human voice: whenever you spoke, a vessel came for me, chattering like some frail and hissing bird, pigeon-chested, thin-veined feet. Sister, I don t listen to lovers, either, who I call by the same names that were yours:dear, beloved. But spirits are not like their progenitors.dear, beloved Their touches can range, texturally, from velvet to bristle. Lover, each time I kiss you I name after you a sickly feeling in my own body, as if each ailing is a previously undiscovered moon orbiting a planet that can only sustain the strangest of life-forms. Sister, I know neither goodness nor mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, as surely that I know the beasts I inherit or create, of all unions familial or otherwise, are speechless and brute, and bound to die soon. Yes, there is much to love about the body. Too, there is much to hate. I cast off care for pleasure, and for labor, teaching my body over time that these things can t coexist. I fear it has started to believe me. My body has never sought wholeness the way yours did, sister. It was always still the dull twilight of early morning with us. You were twenty-four, and when you died, I stopped fearing arson. When I picture us as girls, we are at the base of the mountain from my visio, divining the summit as we diminish into spots of light. We are without parentage. On my mountaintop in midafternoons flocks of wheeling birds gather around the crescent moon. When the moon worms its way through the clouds, it fixes its eyes on me and sings a song that says we live our lives chained to earth, and that when we die the flesh falls off our bones so our bones can turn into the driest of riverbed dirt. Sister, when you died, your bones cast an enchantment. We made a powder of them, and I named the powder ash,ash because ash is a word with neither origin nor afterlife,ash and its definition is the look a doe gets when she s been away from her herd too long. When a person goes missing and we don t know her name, we grant her the surname Doe.Doe With this christening we name all missing persons part of the family of ash, which has no family.ash Sometimes I think that each speck of ashash previously named Priya hums on quiet nightsPriya in a frequency only the other pieces can hear. Inaudible to the waking world she hums to herself. That hum is how my blood became blue; in lieu of oxygen, my body began to breathe in only the vibrations of the hum. Blood has to be born into its colors. Or, more precisely, it has to die into them. In Hesiod s Theogony, Nyx is bornTheogony of Chaos. Erebus, Gaia, and Tartarus are her siblings. Hesiod couldn t decide whether Nyx birthed the Fates or whether the Fates were born of someone else, but he knew that Nyx s children, whoever they were, had no sire. About Nyx s brothers and sisters, Hesiod writes: Earth too, and great Oceanus, and dark Night, the holy race of all the other deathless ones that are for ever, and one day   what? Tell me. Tell me the song they taught you. Tell me how you learned how beautiful Nyx is, how you realized Zeus feared her, and how you first saw that within her every star, from the swollen to the hollow, from the living to the dead, is visible, powered by little but her peerless face. When I returned north for the first time since my father turned my sister into a powder named ash,ash a word born of nothing and with no children, I heard her from a seagull on the ferry I rode from the harbor to the Cape, out of a piping plover on the dunes, in a crow s call on the highway from Boston to Gloucester, past Folly s Cove, Prides Crossing, Rust Island. Then, from my station again on the mountain, I heard my own voice from a brown thrasher. That night I drove through remains of a fresh accident on the mountain highway. The dropping sun lit my back as if heralding fire. A dislocated red front bumper straddled the median, singing a song. Nyx was in the wind, and her siblings, and they bade me sing, too, like Hesiod had asked. Grant lovely song, celebrate the holy race of the deathless gods who are for ever, born of Earth and starry Heaven and gloomy Night and them that briny Sea did rear. Soon all were singing. The median sang with the deep voice of a woman who knows how to sing scat, and the mountain, standing like a moon on earth, responded with a wordless song of its own creation. Ash sang. Dirt sang. To them I lent a melody, which is one of the things I do when I can t sleep. The secret about lullabies: when they work, it s because they sound like something plants would sing in Hades, on the banks  of the river dark. Oh how I wish they worked on me. When the sculptor couldn t sleep, she drew mountains. They were pink, red, ridged and pulsing, and rose from valleys of blue. Or else she d draw eyes that held too many irises, or wombs that bore sweet cysts, or spindle-legged women with outsized, drooping breasts, ill-formed and misshapen eyes for nipples, uneven halos for areolae, made of the same skin as the kind under eyes that have been open for too long. Those songs I sing when I can t sleep are directed to my army of visios. In return, they give me images of myself as different creatures: gibbons, a chicken with a plucked-feather neck, an asteroid, a mountain, a volcano with the thinnest, most translucent shell. Me, as some fantastical beast with eyes lining the inside of my body, watching my diaphragm turn into the ocean I saw from the ferry, watching plumes of sun flare over it as it comes to resemble a dead animal s long-weathered skin. Ghostly ships with dropped anchors materialize to trawl it, and squadrons of men dismount, searching for new blooms in terra mountainous and lush. My heart is a sky embalmed and bright. When the phantoms drop anchor, there to welcome their sailors are screaming pelicans on the rocks, and parades continually wheeling of ugly vultures in funereal garb. In their eyes, the Atlantic always looks besieged by hurricane. Lunar maria means moon seas, but when I hear itLunar mariamoon seas I picture horses, torqued female beasts who live on the moon and whose manes are made of the roots of moon-trees. I did not want to die, but I wanted to want death. None of you ever knew how badly. I have practiced at it. At times I rehearsed like a dancer, surrounded by mirrored walls. At others I moonlighted with movies set on battlefields and abattoirs, pausing and rewinding until I could mimic the motions of actresses who succumb to unexpected poison, or shove knives into their bellies, or fall like Brueghel s boy. I pretended I was standing in a castle dressed like a samurai, looking through a barred window, knowing the trees approaching held a promise so annihilative my flesh would have no choice but to accept. I pictured jumping from the top of the mountain and I sang Love it Love it Love it.Love it Love it Love it On my mountain the birds shroud the pines, and the pines make a spectral outline against the valley of Nyx s body. One afternoon here a man said to his son: All this has to doAll this has to do with eons of time, water over and over, just cutting and cutting the rock. From where I stand on its summit, I can touch the Big Dipper and I can see its children, and another peak, shaped like the back of a horse. It is shadow blue, the same blue as the dying sky. To the Big Dipper and her children I sing a song that asks if they are safe, and tells them that on forest floors, dappled things of glass and light grow from knotted roots. Sister, could I find you on that horse mountain? I wonder if I want to. Have I made this world? Lover, a confession. If I found my sister on any mountain, I would gather her in my arms and take her from its back, singing lullabies. Or else I d take an arrow laced with a drug I d made special for her, and, standing close, push it in her unarmed right flank. Instead of how to die, I ended up studying how to kill. But the sculptor, she asked nothing of her dead. Out of visions of them she made formidable metal spiders she named Maman, Maman, Maman. Maman Maman Maman,MamanMamanMamanMaman Maman Maman who live after the sculptor has died, have all lost children, like my mother. Their domains are terrors   land-terrors, water-terrors, terrors of the open sky. Their hearts are war- grief. Terrors of trees in the joyless forest, of portent. Sometimes in their homes are fires on floods, dire wonders. Their children were all named Doe, which means that the pluralDoe form for children of Maman is deer. For a long time I hatedMamandeer the phrase I am sorry for your loss. I lost nothing. My sister died.I am sorry for your losslostdied But loss is less of a euphemism than its users want;lossto lose means both to have been defeated and to misplace.to loseto have been defeatedto misplaceMaman Maman Maman also answers to Demeter Demeter Demeter.Maman Maman Maman Demeter Demeter Demeter Sister, I could stop no one from taking your head, although I promise you I fought for it, hand-to-hand by the mouth of the bone-house. One day on my mountain, I got to thinking about those other peaks. From a cave underwater I heard: Find them, like flowers strangeFind them, like flowers strange and never before seen. And so it became true. I found mountains covered in smoke-thick fogs, and mountains that lied   those were barely hills. And then I found them: what the mountains in my visio would have looked like had it been summer in that land. Summer brought some changes: my body had no orchids or lichen, and the crown was not of diamonds, but the reek of sewage, wafting over a field   a prairie almost    from which rose tens of signal towers, all blinking red. The base of mountains was, when I got there, still, and in darkness. It was a sky in which every child of every star, living or dead, could be heard humming. The peerless face of the mountain was cragged rock, dust rock, shadow rock. I stayed until day, to watch the birth of a sunbeam so I could then see it age. Later in the day an immense heat came, like another bone-house. I climbed the ridges, which turned to colored ringlets of cloud and ash at the slightest pressure. Sunrise and sunset were scant minutes of shadow-play. The prairie grass s rustle, each blade sang in a different language. There I learned the names of four of the lunar mares: Catfire, Osiris, Blood Oath, and Early Morning. This is who I am. I harbor secret loves, and I do secret work. Catfire, Osiris, Blood Oath, and Early Morning are teaching me how to finally chart a course through time, how to carve journeys in space: they descended from their moon to the crags, followed me home to my moonlike mountain. Lover, my body    you won t be able to keep up with it. Soon you ll have to leave it. You ll have to leave me. Or else I ll leave you, because my body, it invents definitions for the word sadness, like noun, the featherssadnessnounthe feathers on a bird s back. You ll do nothing for me. On my mountain, it s midafternoon, and the wheeling birds are landing steadily, even though no stable ground is here to be found. When they sing, it is a song that I, who know no prayers, imagine to be gospel. A man comes up the mountainside and sings along with them as he walks in circles on the rock. Robbed, sister, was your breath. Robbed, lover, is yours, too. Sister, I wish you could know this feeling: if sung perfectly, pressure on each nerve cluster can make bones irrelevant, whether those bones are living or dead, whether they are ash or dirt. At the base of my mountain is a lake where creatures go to die. Water slides into their spiracles and fills their tracheae. Their tracheae stretch into bellows fit to extinguish the fires in any volcano. When my body showed me sadnesssadness and began there to outline and diagram the word, another definition was noun, a chorus of brass instruments,noun, a chorus of brass instrumentslike upward-turned mouths forged of metal, and another was verb,like upward-turned mouths forged of metalverbto shake like chimes flanking a rock-hewn shore, barely aliveto shake like chimes flanking a rock-hewn shore, barely alive and almost imperceptible for a flash. Sometimes I picture my sister underneath one of the sculptor s spiders. Her head barely reaches the first joint on the spider s leg, and when she looks up, she thinks that the whole sky is the spider s stomach. Maman, she says, I am hungry.MamanI am hungryFood. Food. I am hungry. She runs her shrunken fingerFood. Food. I am hungry from one tagma to another. Her stroke makes lava run faster in all the volcanoes within the tectonic plate on which she lives, and she, unawares, suckles at every ridge she can find. She rests both palms flat against the metal, closes her eyes and cries. What would the world look like with enough lava to fill the Atlantic? I know that the Earth s temperature has risen, and I know that all of its ice will melt. I know there will be no more purple from the sun, that the spider s iron underside is one of the few things that, like my mother, does not sing. At the lake today is a flock of feral cats. Though they re in front of me, their song comes from below, so although I can see them, I picture them swimming in a river that separates mortals from the planet s heart. In this river floats the phantom of a dead doe. Listen to me now, darlings: my sister did not live long enough to see the moon turn red, but I did, and despite those who wish otherwise, myself included, I will see it again. Sadness s fourth definitionSadness is conjunction, bees, forests of them, devotional and thick enough conjunction, bees, forests of them, devotional and thick enoughto knot together human dreams, or human bodies, even when ghostly,to knot together human dreams, or human bodies, even when ghostly,or lovelorn. The underground river gives me no passage,or lovelorn despite my dreams of the phantom that dropped anchor somewhere, and of its amassed pelicans and vultures. Each ghost is filled to the brim with flowers whose scents describe the places they were born, just like mine does, no matter how hard I try to cloak it. On the top of my mountain a man says to a woman: I like how there s just trees. Trees trees trees,I like how there s just treesTrees trees trees she replies. Each time she says the word, her voice makes a new species. I recently tried another way to die: could I fall from a tower filled wall-to-wall with twenty-four thousand living flowers, each planted in the soil covering the tower s floors, six inches deep? The flowers would have heavy-branched spikes for blooms, and would release a powerful smell of bone marrow, and spew a pollen that fills the air until it becomes oppressive. When I opened my mouth to sing of this, instead of a sound my mouth expelled gnats and fog, which is what a spider s milk is made of. The word NyxNyx tastes like sister and means both night and flower. I worrysisternightflower I won t rest again. Do you know how a naked Titan looks, sister? He s swarmed with shadow, but he holds light deep in his stomach, like an electric secret. Dear love, I can t give you what you need from me. All I ll do is take. After my sister died, I learned she always wanted a warm island, garlands draped around her neck. There was no mountain in her vision. Instead, in it she was singing what she imagined was an island song in a language I don t know. She was dancing badly, and breathing with great labor on burnished sands. Sand bores me, sister; I need rock and high altitude. When I am cold, I hear wolves. I think they live in the carillon beside the mountain s lake. Sister, it was always true that I would outlive you. I know exactly how many times my family wished me dead. Don t look up, says a childDon t look up on the top of my mountain. It makes you want to fall.It makes you want to fall It will always be still the dull twilight of early morning with us. This is one of the curses of living. In the end, my visio alone will sing and dance, breathing heavily. Every day the sunbeams in it turn a brighter pink. Dears. Beloveds. All of you. Your blood is bewitched, and bade to move into places it wasn t meant to go, steeped deeply in poisons it can t purge. You share the look on your face with all the others, whether deer, child, or man. If you look deeply enough into any other pair of eyes, your heart valves start to change allegiances. Your body s lakes fill with the other s want, until all you want, in turn, is what the other wants, which rises in you like seawater. There are species of flowers and invasive weeds that live only in another s gaze, whether lovelorn, hate-filled, hopeless, or hungry. I am looking into your eyes right now, and in my mind are two girl deer. Sisters. With thin-hooved legs steady, digging into grass. They disappear into the woods, which are part of a forest in a painting. When the novelist saw this painting, he thought that there he could see men turning into birds and birds turning into men, and those same men turning then into sea creatures, and then back into birds. From this final change scales and tentacles would linger on their backs as they wheeled through the air, as would the dream of filling their lungs with the sea, for which they would ache. The definition of deer is lost. The definition of beloveddeerlostbeloved is dissolution. On the top of my mountain I hear a motherdissolution call to a faceless child, Where are you? The chatteringWhere are you? and thin voice of a boy from the top of a tree cries back,In the woods. And then, beguilingly: Come into the woods.In the woodsCome into the woods Around the orbs of light in the forest that I still don t know if the Dipper s children can see, new trees grow beside the pines: elms, birches, willows, one strange Western juniper. Each creature in this forest was once something, or someone, else    the novelist was right. The top of one of the elms is a sprig of radiant blood. Sister, I was very young when I found out you were cloven-hooved. I did what I could. I want to say that you can trust me, that I am listening to you, and that you can speak to me and that I will speak to you at last. Tell me about the beasts that got you. The beasts who carry me when I am too weak to carry my deer alone are Catfire, Osiris, Blood Oath, and Early Morning. I would like to believe that I carry this deer for you, that I ll be able to tell you what it feels like to have a hungry mouth on your lip or nipple. I want to say:Sister, I promise. But the definition of myth is noun,Sister, I promisemythnounthe idea that any one creature can ever hear another.the idea that any one creature can ever hear another And while I beguile you to betray yourself to me, like lovers do in their sleep, I am lying to you. No, death did not bring this to us. It has always been true. I, sister, am a selfish woman, and you, sister, were a mute one. My body invents words and swells with prophecies. Its effort shows in insect bites and rashes that don t heal, in my peeled hands, bleeding groin, wistful gut, misaligned jaw, mole-like left eye, lump-riddled womb. Dears. Beloveds. You ve been asleep a long time, but we all return to the waking world someday. And when you do at last come back, you will find me spent and alone, ugly, wounded, ungrateful, ill. Shaking and calling to you for aid. Loveless. Without a soul or even the memory of pleasure. The last lover to desert me will deem me rancid. The last thing I hear my sister s voice from will be dirt. Of the mares I will have left only Early Morning, who won t know that I will soon take her hide, turn it into an ocean that will, at last, cleave open my skull.

That night the moon rose in the window. Its light touched the pane and spread over the floor. The girls climbed out of their beds and gathered in the glow, where their hands came alive. Their chatter filled their chests with such gladness it flowed out past the sentry girl at the door and down the corridor until it struck the matron s ears. She rocked forward, enraged, and thundered up the corridor. The sentry girl gave the alarm. They flew for their beds. The matron burst in. Her arm swung and connected. A girl dropped. The hand of the moon went to the girl, tapping her on the shoulder, tapping to no avail. It withdrew, gliding back to the window and out. When the sun came up, its blaze seething into the floor, the girls gathered again at the window. They watched as the gardener dug a hole. His shovel thrust firmly in the ground, he lifted a covered figure and let drop. Its arms were crossed as it tumbled to the bottom. The gardener grimaced and covered the hole. That night the moon rose in the window. Its light touched the pane and spread over the floor. The girls climbed out of their beds and gathered in the glow, where their hands came alive.    Translated from the American Sign LanguageTranslated from the American Sign LanguageTranslated from the American Sign LanguageTranslated from the American Sign Language

It is the story of the falling rain to turn into a leaf and fall again it is the secret of a summer shower to steal the light and hide it in a flower and every flower a tiny tributary that from the ground flows green and momentary is one of water's wishes and this tale hangs in a seed-head smaller than my thumbnail if only I a passerby could pass as clear as water through a plume of grass to find the sunlight hidden at the tip turning to seed a kind of lifting rain drip then I might know like water how to balance the weight of hope against the light of patience water which is so raw so earthy-strong and lurks in cast-iron tanks and leaks along drawn under gravity towards my tongue to cool and fill the pipe-work of this song which is the story of the falling rain that rises to the light and falls again

Now is before he was born. Days of air shaken by bees, crow song probing eaves and quays. Maker of the future a perfect terra-cotta tense, a tense which sings. The absence of push in his educationpush was unpresaged by the door s lack of wired Sesame. He waits and waits for egress. The door needs only his touch. Its only desire is to swing. He waits for it to open itself, as the cloud opens for the melting press of the sun. He is ready to rot where he leans, leaving a breeze-blown blemish long after he has arrived. Long before he has come into being.

Don t bother the earth spirit who lives here. She is working on a story. It is the oldest story in the world and it is delicate, changing. If she sees you watching she will invite you in for coffee, give you warm bread, and you will be obligated to stay and listen. But this is no ordinary story. You will have to endure earthquakes, lightning, the deaths of all those you love, the most blinding beauty. It s a story so compelling you may never want to leave; this is how she traps you. See that stone finger over there? That is the only one who ever escaped.

what about those nosegays?! If you were to return I would give you more, for all you have given us, for your going first. Those posies might have a peony, a freesia, a tulip   an eye snack and nostril snack, I could not get enough of giving you coronation bundles, handing them and almost bowing, tongue-tied with respectful adoring, with gobbling the sight of you the sound, the bouquets saying mother-   we would not be here, without your song, your eye.  

this gin-heavy heaven, blessed ground to think gay & mean we.gaywe. bless the fake id & the bouncer who knew this need to be needed, to belong, to know how a man taste full on vodka & free of sin. i know not which god to pray to. i look to christ, i look to every mouth on the dance floor, i order a whiskey coke, name it the blood of my new savior. he is just. he begs me to dance, to marvel men with the                                                                                    dash of hips i brought, he deems my mouth in some stranger s mouth necessary. bless that man s mouth, the song we sway sloppy to, the beat, the bridge, the length of his hand on my thigh & back & i know not which country i am of. i want to live on his tongue, build a home of gospel & gayety i want to raise a city behind his teeth for all boys of choirs & closets to refuge in. i want my new god to look at the mecca i built him & call it damn good or maybe i m just tipsy & free for the first time, willing to worship anything i can taste.

            i            iFor Laurita, my sister s friendFor Laurita, my sister s friend The moon is dead dead   it will come back to life in the spring when a south wind ruffles the brow of the poplars when our hearts yield their harvest of sighs when the roofs wear their grass hats The moon is dead dead   it will come back to life in the spring            ii            iiFor Isabelita, my sisterFor Isabelita, my sister The evening sings a lullaby to the oranges My little sister sings  the earth is an orange  The moon weeping says  I want to be an orange  You can t be   my dear    even if you turn pink or a little bit lemon How sad!   Translated from the SpanishTranslated from the SpanishTranslated from the Spanish

Hell-raiser, razor-feathered risers, windhover over Peshawar, power's joystick-blithe thousand-mile scythe, proxy executioner's proxy ax pinged by a proxy server, winged victory, pilot cipher unburdened by aught but fuel and bombs, fool of God, savage idiot savant sucking your benumbed trigger-finger gamer's thumb  

I found Rome in the woods. Fair to admit it s mostly tundra to the west in the park, past Toklat the Denali I revised, low grasslands engineered to freeze deep by October   this being Alaska   the great             Tabularium close to the Temple of             Castor and Pollux I rebuilt that same summer                not superimposed, exact as any scheme in secret   the Arch of Septimius Severus at the gravel bar         where fox drank from a river turned stream,            a Theater of Marcellus near                the ranger station where one raven,                                                                                     such a brat,    complained of                       my Circus Maximus, Trajan s Column,                               my Baths of Diocletian, too many spots soaked in unpronounceable Latin.                     I really did, I shouldered bits of it,       a ruin-hushed haunted business, my brain                                                          a truck bed, a lift, pulleys big as a whale s heart, expletives of cheap wonder all over                                                                   my woodlot and expanse.                           One self-anoints to embellish day, years, life thus far, and think oneself so ...                            Then busted    by a raven! Well, that s memory for you, that s so-called         civilization for you, to layer up,                          to redo the already done. I mean it s a fact, the puny life span we re allotted.               And proof   Denali in August, fireweed, spunky scrawny first Latinate   Erechtites hieracifolia   Erechtites hieracifolia                giving off flowers to mark                what weeks left, little                time bomber, time traveler, ancient                slips red-flagging the countdown to winter                by climbing its own stalk. Something perverse about that. Something perfectly fiendishly self-conscious about that.        From the start perverse, any premise.       Ask ... We can t know. To be compelled             makes an occasion. Rome s grand      past horrific, fire and ash, swamp into bog, lust               and bloodlust    The Alaska Range dreams lurid as Rome,                                         the worst way below being fire, summer snow at night       off the highest peaks by noon               as distant from our cabin as the size of a hand if I                          held up the one with                          an eye in the middle to know how this works. Some have the power tohow this works raise from the dead a before, beforebefore, before scary and beautiful            back to mystery cults, in caves, rubble far under a Roman street, the altar to Mithras still slaying his bull, crumbling the stonework.             All things being equal. But they re not.             All things being equal                     Agony, it s older.                       Ask the moose at Denali,                          the snowshoe hare, the lynx, such a wily courtly lot.                                            Ask Ovid       banished to his hovel on the Black Sea, aching                 for Rome s exalted rude cacophony, each       exiled month a big thick X down                                   Februarius,                                   Februarius                                 Aprilis to home-shattered sick enough                                 Aprilis for an undersong. Look it up! Undersong: a strain; a droning;Undersong: a strain; a droning; the burden of a song                                                 Maybe that lowest common denominator is contagious. Rome or Denali, a mash-up of lunge and cry out, predator and prey throwing coins to a fountain, footholds made first by a hoof, pickpockets at buses and trains, nuns queuing up their no-nonsense, thorny brambles, raggedy spruce groves,                                            a look, a nod to sell loveless love on the street, a chain of mountains in choral repeat, saints stained to glass, how ice gouged rivers from rock-bound,                                  the one-lung rapturous common-sense Pope all outstretched arms, his little popemobile circling the thrilled at St. Peter s up on our rickety chairs to see in six, seven languages how radiant                                Cross my heart, he was. And Keats, Keats is coughing.       You find the fossil record everywhere. In woods, tundra, under streets, in cadaver labs.                                  Not those bright transparencies, wistful orderly page after page in biology, a lie, a kind of flip-book romance. It s the one big mess of us in us, the generous extraordinary dead prove that, signing a paper, giving themselves away                                             to be cut, disembodied fordisembodied the knowing it, sunk to their chemical depth in some afterlife, opened on a table by kids really,                                              belabored doctors-to-be, our shabby shared wilderness to untangle,wilderness bones   joints   arteries   valves,                                                         The Dissector                                                         The Dissector in hand, weirdest how-to book on the planet. For Keats too, 1819, his scribbled roses and sunflowers in margins,                                                                   his training,                                                            his anatomy theatre, looking down and later: still London, then Rome (he who gets it,gets   body fails, second floor, beside the Spanish Steps).                                            Heart, not my heart anymore.                                      Forgive me. I m worse than the hopelessly confused misnamed English sparrow, descendant of the great weaver birds of Africa, a finch that lost the gene        for nest, how to beneath, to across so intricate,nestto beneath, to across precise, bringing bringing sticks and hair and bits of shiny paper. Undersong: the burden of a song.burden                                                        Poor bird. Poor sweet muddled middle of it. I watched morning after morning, his offering ...                                                                            It s Keats who made claims about beauty and time. His bed at the last                         too low for the window, his must-have                                 tell me, what s out there                                    tell me, what s out there    I admit: a ridiculous layering, Rome in Denali. Just because? Because I went to both in short order?because Two continents, an ocean apart. My mother loved hand-me-down expressions    never the twain shall meet.never the twain shall meet They do meet.                            To repeat: that s civilization for you. Happenstance and right now drag alongright now future and past                              and why the hell not the Denali, the Rome in any of us, no two states of being more unalike, worn-out compulsion to collect and harbor, piece together,                                                                    stupid into                                                                    stupid into some remember machine.    Such fabulous unthinkable inventions we ve made to merge or unmake: the trash compactor,    the poem, all tragedy and story, pencils sharpened to a point that keeps breaking, wilderness gone inward as                    an ocean-going ship s container,                          a Gatling gun,                                  the AR-15 of the seething deranged,                                          the H-bomb,                                              Roman legions to Canterbury to blood-up fields into legend then dig the first plumbing but                                             how can you                                             how can you                                             be in two places at once                                             be in two places at once                                             when you re not anywhere at all!                                             when you re not anywhere at all!         (Thank you, Firesign Theatre, brilliant wackos,               old vinyl on a turntable still in the game ... )                       Fine. Fuck it. Start over.       See the sheep on high ledges, the arctic squirrels below. See the way Dante saw, sweeping his arm across Vasari s great painting as Boccaccio looks off, the plague sealing city after city. Dante in hell, steady-luminous      those fact-finding trips to service            his worldly Inferno.Inferno Winter sleeps through.through August at Denali, bears shovel it down        a razor-edged maw                                                    twigs! berries! more stems!    Fate hoards to prepare, sub-zeros, fattens into ....     See the park s camper bus, 92 miles how most of us jolt and slow, crossing hours more daylight than night all summer, rattling tin can with its exhaust and hissing gravel, the fearlandslidelandslide                   an undersong just-possible, how we zigzag a mountain. Look!                   Nearing a bear, the young caribou abruptly                              hesitant, shy as a leaf   No! Don t! Do not! That grizzlyNo! Don t! Do not! huge, bent to his ploy justjust                                                  these berries around here, his ignore ignore, sure, quiet-tense as a trigger, and we of                       fogged scratched windows so hard to open    stop! The bus stopped. Jesus. The thing curious, closer ...    Jesus                      They re not                      They re notthat smart anyhow, a stage-whispering drunk from the backthat smart anyhow,       of our imperial realm, mile 62, the Park Road. What did Venus decree in her temple up whichever narrow street in Rome, the Ancients                               stink of slops, standing water,            a bear chained to a slave (out of slav, by the way,slav                              backdrop is horde, human spoils)horde, human spoils both shackled to a grindstone for                                                              a later mob and roar. Here s what we saw: the little caribou   in reverse wanders sideways and safe.                                              Our bus one big sigh or like a wheezing asthmatic the brakes unbrake. Bad dream, bad dream, the undersong start to all fable if                         for real we d seen that kill back to lions off their continent cornered, bloodied in the great amphitheaters, rearing up, a nail to hammer s                                    bite and blow. The wilderness in us is endless. Near the cabin, near evening, a warbler                                in the fireweed                                                     hawk saw or heard,                           his switchblade clicked to                                                                            I was and I was                       whirling feathers, either bird       Every hunger                             is first century. Forever-thus    feral cats at the Forum about to leap too.                                                         The Forum, last homage    I shoveled holes and rocks to    remake, mile 82, while the haymouse riddled the meadow    down deep, her catacombs.       Time + beauty = ruins. Perfect shapes in the mind        meet my friends Pointless and Threat and Years of        Failure to Meld or Put to Rest. Ruthless                                                                                  is human. I ask a composer: How to live with this undersong thingundersong                              over and over, how to                                                                     get rid of it,                                                                         the world of it      He looks at me. What undersong thing? And shrugsWhat undersong thing?       I ll put it on the test! Let students define it.       I ll put it on the test! Let students define it.       So I dreamt such a test: Go there. To Rome.                     Half-doze against a wall                       two thousand years of      flesh    sweat    insect wing ago, stone laid by hand, by a boy when a whip, a whip, a welling up, his will not speak. will not speak     Have at it. Please explain. Please fill in this blank. Grief punctures like ice, moves like a glacier    to flat and slog and myth, low blue and white flowers        we hiked trail-less. The rangers insist. They insist   trail-less       never follow or lead, never lay down a path.       never follow or lead, never lay down a path.                                                                         From above the look of us spread out, our seven or eighta band, littlea band stray exhausted figures                                            as over the land bridge from Asia,circa: prehistory keeps coming, older than Rome,circa both   both underfoot, understory, underway          miles below numb, it s burning.       To see at all, you timetime                                          and this time and time again.this timetime again The spirit leans intrigued, the other part bored, then there s want,want                                                                     then there s wait.wait Once a city began with a wolf whose two human pups would       build, would watch it fall, nursing                                               at her milk for centuries                in marble                in bronze.           She stands there and cries of                                                                that pleasure, by turns a blood-chill. The tundra. At night. A snake eats its own tail, forever at it on a fresco. A real snake                        leaves his skin near the gravel bar. Some words sting, some are sung. Another life isn t smaller.

Well yes, I said, my mother wears a dot. I know they said "third eye" in class, but it's not an eye eye, not like that. It's not some freakeye third eye that opens on your forehead like on some Chernobyl baby. What it means is, what it's showing is, there's this unseenshowing eye, on the inside. And she's marking it. It's how the X that says where treasure's at is not the treasure, but as good as treasure.  All right. What I said wasn't half so measured. In fact, I didn't say a thing. Their laughter had made my mouth go dry. Lunch was after World History; that week was India myths, myths, caste system, suttee, all the Greatest Hits. The white kids I was sitting with were friends, at least as I defined a friend back then. So wait, said Nick, does your mom wear a dot?your I nodded, and I caught a smirk on Todd  She wear it to the shower? And to bed?  whie Jesse sucked his chocolate milk and Brad was getting ready for another stab. I said, Hand me that ketchup packet there. And Nick said, What? I snatched it, twitched the tear, and squeezed a dollop on my thumb and worked circles till the red planet entered the house of war and on my forehead for the world to see my third eye burned those schoolboys in their seats, their flesh in little puddles underneath, pale pools where Nataraja cooled his feet.

My father came down not killed from among others, killers or killed, for whom he'd worn a uniform, and he lived a long afterward,   a steady man on the flattest of plains. I called after him many times, surprised when I heard the catch in my own voice. He didn't know how to find the solace   of listening to someone else speak of what he'd seen and survived. He himself closed his own mouth against his own words.   In the wrong sequence, his spirit, then his mind, and last his body crossed over that infamous, peat-inky, metaphorical water that has no far shore.   I think he was carried like a leaf in currents so gentle that a duckling, had it been alive, could have braved them, but too strong for a leaf. And saturated   with minerals that steadily replaced organic cells, the water turned my father, an ex-soldier, to leaf-delicate stone inscribed with the axioms of countless veins.  

Tarrargon, are you a wild boar? My friend, lemon zest, has not been that Thyme, Cognac, falooda glass noodlefalooda These things prowl the night without cape Gooseberries or bacalao Tarragon, are you a wild boar? Each time I eat you, I stop breathing Little owl, where is your happiness? Wake up + make people believe In you, gastrique + steaklette Is that chive embarrassed? To be with the savoy cabbage? Tarragon, are you a wild boar? I was born female, hyper-focused Let me trim your skirt, halibut It s dragging salt against my oregano Buttered by butter in no butter Tarragon, are you a wild boar? It s too bad the caper isn t wearing A cape when the Peruvian potatoes Are sitting on a bed of coals while Floating down a river coconut On the verge of falling off A truffle, which is a Shadow floating inside of a shadow

Under the trees, where everything Is still possible in prescribed doses: Hundreds of accordion-like units Without edges. But there is no unwinding   Of minutes to stay the execution Of a rain-shot weekend in early Beach weather, no elixir To revive the amputated flower   Still kicking on its ghost-stem In a bowl of water, no direction In which to steer The hapless, puzzled out-of-towner   Other than straight ahead, To the sheer drop-off Where his guidebook gutters Or deposits him, addressless,   In thin air.

When I found your face on a pillow of leaves you had already erased it. A nest so heavy can stay in the heavens only by reversal.   By this law the knees are laced with abandon.   I said to the young man.   If watching is the manufacturer, and I lose you what angel takes the place of a dowry or distance in this leaf action?        Subject to like passions as we areSubject to like passions as we are my soul herself, myself a possession I could not mistake for the man (his language and Latin) yet we are  taken to  a love passage I had hardly noticed in the late talk of money The work of love and the work of art has no sleeping part Is a drop of light in a small silver socket, a rosy dime in a daylight tryst Is a keeper and no spendera keeper and no spender As seeing who is invisible: a kind of flaxen thing caught in stone I obeyed and read further  I am hemmed  Though my heart were a pear tree threaded with fire Lion you leapt through me like fineness in the boundary gene         Conductor you knit me as isthmus     Can I touch it Night is going 200 miles an hr as usual     In this way we find we are suddenly altered If I were a day would you like me better     Where were you you who in a bath changed meHow to be walkingHow to be walking is a glorious porthole Must I insist on an absence more foolish and secret When your timber s a forest I can t see for the tree in my bed Gentle captive, it is a larger than murder we tender     Fond and afire my style and my anchor Master there s a boat for no lesser completion than beauty s sweetest dress when you look on me kind Who am I to stop this flowing Least of all that home mile Sinking in the real I dreamed there was a further island Perhaps (how I thought you) to salt that harness with pleasure         Lovely hero where the lovely hero bounds an acre hidden between eros and its errorseros  Finding a dozen darts beneath the skin of Watching the wire of a skinny flame No other lovely hero found the back behind her secret form of symmetry Her gleaming difference Her schoolish way in pretty understandings Said   Not done   Not said   Undone Wealthy sadness has a way of winning everyone This is the end of my body as you know it its superfluous penchant for love its poorer costume, its shiny disaster         What is a maiden,                          boatswain, but a fiery lair and a teary citadel By the smallest shipwreck a daughter is laughter Yet equaled                          as in a fable this Gibraltar goes headlong in a just king s love See how his hands are her mercy and measure her number and rescue O Perseus     Pythagoras     Pierre my Pierre         What rules a body s buried factions when laundered by morning   When called by our names although we are invisible   Sleeping I forget my animal When the animal comes I m forgotten because of it   How was it called in its own country   crossing a street in order to come inside  

Anne identified with Cate until it became a bona fide illness, for Boris had left Cate, resulting not only in psychic estrangement but an unconscious stream of hostility directed not at Boris, but at his new woman, Anne, whom Cate viewed as her rival. Cate remained excessively tender with Boris, though Cate, for him, had been a  totem animal  from which he gained power by  eating.  Whereas Boris was the patriarch, Anne was the ego alien; and whereas Cate was Anne s fixation, Anne was no one s obsession, so she was admitted to a psychiatric ward with the unbidden associations she could not be induced to abandon. On the rare occasions she slept, the manifest and latent content of her dreams was the dance of abandonment between Boris and Cate, which Anne, in her waking hours, projected onto the walls, as though screening a silent film. She could not be induced to abandon this footage; she could not be induced to abandon her object love of Boris (whose own object choice was his ego-libido); or her identification with Cate, who felt no friendship towards Anne. Soon Anne drew a mental triangle on every surface she saw, be it phallic or concave, and sometimes this triangle was isosceles, sometimes it was equilateral, and often it was right.

Go to the mother, to the father, to the house where no trees grow,   to the bedroom, the door closed, to her fear and to his fear,   and their shame, their longing, and to their bodies, their bodies young,   their bodies separate, their bodies together. How far must you   go back? Her womb. Her child body and his child body.   Go to first hairs. To flesh, chests, arms, faces, buttocks, and stomachs.   There, a wrinkle. There, color, nipples, and bellybuttons.   Go to the eyes, see what she sees and what he sees.   To the fingertips, which want what the eyes have made   their own. Go to want, to love, to what wants more than love.   Go to sins. What are your sins? Go to where the mother   is not mother, the father is not father, and kiss her lips, and kiss his mouth.   Do not be ashamed or afraid. The past is a strange land.   Go because you can. Go because you can come back.

His blue guitar is lacquered so brightly when he leans a certain way into his song I can see my head in my hands reflected. And when he leans back into the emotion of another chorus his guitar returns to blue: the blue of unboiled lobsters fading to a general Biro-lid blue and with a patina of fine tiger stripes the color of sky midway towards a springtime horizon. I ve had a long time to consider this. The man with the blue guitar has a little tin for his plectrums, with a cartoon pelican on its lid, standing on top of the words  Pelican Throat Lozenges.  Between songs he tells me that he found it in the abandoned house from the song. Which song? My next song. It s called  The Abandoned House.  The man with the blue guitar reads his lyrics from a special leather book where he has written all his lyrics. Sometimes he forgets the words and searches the page as he plays, his face scrunching as he sings new noises in their place. I prefer the noises. This song is calledThis song is called Halloween Moon this song is called Lovesick Bougainvillea this song is called Bourbon Canal this song is called St. Michael s Boots My Cousin s Old Coat The Wrestler s Arm The Old Arm Wrestler Dead Man s Stetson Panama Morning The Skulls of the Cathedral Lawn Shadow in the Gully in the Foothills of My Youth My Heart Is a Love Letter the Folds Are Worn Through. If I seem too pleased each time he finishes he takes it as an invitation to play another song. If I do not seem pleased enough each time he finishes his determination only reaches further through his face and so he playsSaratoga Skyline or Sad Preacher s Walk or The LonelySaratoga SkylineSad Preacher s WalkThe Lonely Way to Gypsy Street or The Story of Your Life orThe Story of Your LifeThe Story of the Man with the Blue GuitarThe Story of the Man with the Blue Guitar which is the story behind this, my next song.

The dead say little in their letters they haven't said before. We find no secrets, and yet how different every sentence sounds heard across the years.             My father breaks my heart simply by being so young and handsome. He's half my age, with jet-black hair. Look at him in his navy uniform grinning beside his dive-bomber.  Come back, Dad! I want to shout.Come back, Dad!  He says he misses all of us (though I haven't yet been born). He writes from places I never knew he saw, and everyone he mentions now is dead.   There is a large, long photograph curled like a diploma a banquet sixty years ago. My parents sit uncomfortably among tables of dark-suited strangers. The mildewed paper reeks of regret.   I wonder what song the band was playing, just out of frame, as the photographer arranged your smiles. A waltz? A foxtrot?Get out there on the floor and dance! Get out there on the floor and dance! You don't have forever.You don't have forever.   What does it cost to send a postcard to the underworld? I'll buy a penny stamp from World War II and mail it downtown at the old post office just as the courthouse clock strikes twelve.   Surely the ghost of some postal worker still makes his nightly rounds, his routine too tedious for him to notice when it ended. He works so slowly he moves back in time carrying our dead letters to their lost addresses.   It's silly to get sentimental. The dead have moved on. So should we. But isn't it equally simple-minded to miss the special expertise of the departed in clarifying our long-term plans?   They never let us forget that the line between them and us is only temporary.Get out there and dance! the letters shoutGet out there and dance!  adding, Love always. Can't wait to get home! Love always. Can't wait to get home!  And soon we will be. See you there.See you there.

He stood up suddenly and threw himself and his grey canvas sack to the bus's floor, then, clutching the sack's edges, he struck the floor with it again, four or five times, then stopped. No one moved, everyone had moved for a moment, away from him as he had struck the floor. He sat looking at the contents of the bag, now strewn all over. Cassetts, broken cassette cases, assorted papers, and pieces of his old cassette recorder. He sat quite still for a moment. Whatever had been happening wasn't happening anymore. Nothing continued to happen, then something began to happen again. He began to pick up his things, put them into the sack. No one moved. They all looked at him, or they all tried not to look at him. He put his things into the sack with steadily increasing speed.  

I loved this tree. South of San Antonio, west of the heart, growing in the ravines of the Pecos River inside me, down across the Rio Grande and up into the Llano s staked plains, tree of memory, tree of ghosts, tree of rain  under birdsong whispers you cradled me in your canopy. When I was a baby, I stroked the soft hair on your leaves. You were my first true church, and when rains came our whole bodies shook and shimmered with God s words. You let me bury  all my secrets in your dirt and sleep in your altar as we drifted through stars. Forgive me, Tree, for humiliating you. I kicked at your bark. Spit on you. Tree, I cut you  and carved cruel words on you in reverse in my rough, crooked cursive, with a rusted green knife I stole from a bitch, scarring your sacred skin. I burned you with a lighter shaped like a cowboy boot, left bird dogs tied to you for days on end, let drill sergeants in training from the nearby base lash out and practice on you. I let belly-gods, plug-ugly bruisers, devouring cowboys and butchers stuff themselves into me, hog-tie me whole and slap me around as you watched. When I laughed and made animal sounds, I scared you. I chewed you out. Made fun of you. I used toxins and poisons  to make you immaculate. I wanted you perfect. I nailed a no-trespassing sign and a big security light to your side. I sold pieces of you off. I abandoned you. I abandoned myself. All around us the underground world overflows with love. Season after season you return, sap rising up from your roots, unfinished, always becoming. I defended against love for as long as I could until I couldn t.You no longer have to hide your self in your deepest self.You no longer have to hide your self in your deepest self.You no longer need the ones you thought you most needed.You no longer need the ones you thought you most needed. I know I am not good at this, or anything really, but I m trying.Roll on, roll on, roll on Roll on, roll on, roll on  Tonight, I m wearing a red dress, under a man s honeyed mouths and tent. Your red flowers open and crown and cover us in a Sunday of pollens. And when I press my ear to your thickness, to your heart, I hear: bells, bells, bells.

We opened the door to the fairy house & took our tea on matching pebble seats. Somehow we got out of there alive though something crystalline of us remains in that dark, growing its facets. We opened the door to the fairy house at the oak s black ankle. You askedWhat could happen? as you disappearedWhat could happen? somehow. We got out of there alive the strange tea still warm in our bellies. Inside, our hosts gave damn few answers.Who built that door? Is this a fairy house?Who built that door? Is this a fairy house? They had no faces yet. We spoke into their quince-bud ears. You wept. Somehow we got out of there alive though we didn t quite return. Our life is different now we ve drunk the tea. They re alive somehow. I got us out. Why did you open the door to the fairy house?

Not coop so much as aviary. The way everyone thinks the youngest two are twins despite their differences. This memory of a blue dress the tall man called a cool drink of water. A carpet burning the skin right off my back. What I needed to say versus what I was able  the way you can't see an image in sunlight unless it's matte.Could you drink pee if there were nothingCould you drink pee if there were nothing else? The oldest constructs a world to inhabit if he had to. He has to. Immaculate as snow a season away. I wasn't honest, so it haunts me.

There is the lightning-white moment when I learn    the way my costive train to Krakow stopped   and I woke to find myself, in jostling twilight,   at the Auschwitz platform  that the Italian postcard   I garnered in Milan years ago as a genial talisman   isn t of a pipe-dreaming Italian boy,   no, no, but an androgynous image of Sophie Scholl,   the young, intrepid resistance heroine  as if I d registered,   in my Schubert-adoring daughter, my school-resisting son,   a fire undetected before: Doric-strong nouns demanding  What would you undertakeWhat would you undertaketo stop tyranny? to stop tyranny?    stouthearted nouns:integrity, probity, courage;integrity, probity, courage;   in benighted Munich, the spit-in-the-eye swiftness,   the unbossed bloom of a crossed-out swastika,   the fierce integrity in the gust of the word freedomfreedom   sprayed over the walls and ramparts of a deranged   fatherland that rent flesh as if it were foolscap   Someday you will beSomeday you will bewhere I am now,where I am now,   a steely, premonitory Sophie proclaimed to the rapacious   Nazi tribunal that rushed her to execution    Gazer, collector, in clarity s name, look close, then closer:   it s not just a bud-sweet, pensive beauty,   a bel ragazzo s charm;bel ragazzo all these years:   it s the spirit of crusading youth that I ve cherished.  

You and I on the boat notice the print the whales leave, the  huge ring their diving draws for a time on the surface. Is it like that when we lose one another? Don't know, can't. But I want to believe when we can no longer walk across a room for a hug, can no longer step into the arms of the other, there will be this: some trace that stays while the great body remains below out of sight, dark mammoth shadow flick of flipper body of delight diving deep.

It takes more than a wish to catch a fish you take the hook you add the bait you concentrate and then you wait you wait     you wait but not a bite the fish don t have an appetite so tell them what good bait you ve got and how your bait can hit the spot this works a whole lot better than a wish if you really want to catch a fish

Unfortunately happiness Depends a little more than less On undependable, and hence Absurdly charming elements.  

I was already an old man when I was born. I was already an old man when I was born.  Small with a curved back, he dragged his leg when walking the streets of Copenhagen. "Little Kierkegaard,  they called him. Some meant it kindly. The more one suffersThe more one suffersthe more one acquires a sense of the comic. the more one acquires a sense of the comic.  His hair rose in waves six inches above his head.Save me, O God, from ever becoming sure. Save me, O God, from ever becoming sure. What good is faith if it is not irrational?What good is faith if it is not irrational?  Christianity requires a conviction of sin. Christianity requires a conviction of sin.  As a boy tending sheep on the frozen heath, his starving father cursed God for his cruelty. His fortunes changed. He grew rich and married well. His father knew these blessings were God's punishment. All would be stripped away. His beautiful wife died, then five of his children. Crippled Soren survived.The self-consuming sickness unto death is despair.The self-consuming sickness unto death is despair.  What the age needs is not a genius but a martyr.What the age needs is not a genius but a martyr. Soren fell in love, proposed, then broke the engagement. No one, he thought, could bear his presence daily.My sorrow is my castle. His books were readMy sorrow is my castle.  but ridiculed. Cartoons mocked his deformities His private journals fill seven thousand pages. You could read them all, he claimed, and still not know him.He who explains this riddle explains my life.He who explains this riddle explains my life.  When everyone is Christian, ChristianityWhen everyone is Christian, Christianitydoes not exist. The crowd is untruth. Rememberdoes not exist. The crowd is untruth. Rememberwe stand alone before God in fear and trembling.we stand alone before God in fear and trembling. At forty-two he collapsed on his daily walk. Dying he seemed radiant. His skin had become almost transparent. He refused communion from the established church. His grave has no headstone.Now with God's help I shall at last become myself.Now with God's help I shall at last become myself.

Time declines all, they say. Progression inevitable, they say. Hills that rise slant down. You have the floor, they say. How far down,  I say. They say how low can you go. How steep a slope, I say. Slight drop, they say. Plateau. Slump, not flatline, they say. You understand, these were words before: up, down, I say, words I do not own but feel I should. Downward, they say, is normal, but plateau is where we ll put you. Stay flexible. Incline toward this wind. Go ahead and zanaflex, they say. Progress, the way of the future, they say. We are  inclined to say it s relatively stable. Mesa, not mountain, they say. The fall- off hills rise in masses, flat on top. White clouds bite down on them like teeth, I recall, chomping. What s the grade of incline, I say. They say mild decline. They say they feel inclined to know. Come down here, I say. Take a tumble. Slide. Incline your ear. They decline my invitation. Making progress, they say. An upgrade. Very busy. Your health has reached its quota and is no longer available, they say. Have I been downgraded, essentially going downhill, I say. A positive result yields a negative outcome, they say. They decline to know for sure. Testing negative, they say, has a positive outcome. A decline in contrast sensitivity, I say. They say slow descent, the good kind. A little tip. Lucky dip. I assent and say all s downhill from here. I say downhill into the flood. Dive, I say, not cannonball. Controlled fall. I am inclined to take a dip, I say, from time to time, but always rise to the surface. Dip down, they say. Tip forward. Don t let us (drop now) push you, they say, a nudge. I say it is our policy to decline tips, a pleasure to   Arching off the incline, I incline to a different wind.You understand, these were words before: up, downThe fall- off hills rise in masses, flat on top. White clouds bite down on them like teethYour health has reached its quota and is no longer available

Complete in ourselves,Complete in ourselves, we look like scraps of paper anyway:left alone, we could tellleft alone, we could tell our mothers and one another our owners flimsiest secrets and play together all dayflimsiest secrets and play together all dayuntil we became intertwined, which is whyuntil we became intertwined, which is why you tryto keep us permanently apart.to keep us permanently apart. One of us is a gossamer pirate ship,a frigate whose rigging the industriala frigate whose rigging the industrialsunset highlights, sail by oblong sail.sunset highlights, sail by oblong sail. Another resembles a Greek letter   gamma,gammaor lambda; others stillor lambda; others stilllambda a ligature, a propeller, a fat lip.Our will is not exactly the wind s will.Our will is not exactly the wind s will. Underlined by sand,whose modes of coagulation and cohabitationwhose modes of coagulation and cohabitation none of the human pedestrians understand, we take off on our almost arbitrarilylengthy singletons of stringlengthy singletons of stringtowards the unattainable, scarilytowards the unattainable, scarily lofty realm of hawk and albatrossand stay, backlit by cirrocumulus.and stay, backlit by cirrocumulus.It seems to be up to youIt seems to be up to you to keep usup in the air, and to make sure our paths never cross.up in the air, and to make sure our paths never cross.

It s turneresque in twilight. The word comes at me with its headlights on, so it s revelation and not death. I figure I m halfway home though I ve only started. Nothing is moving but me: I m a blackbird. The neigh- bor s in labor, but so am I, pushing against the road. Physics tells us nothing is lost, but I ve been copping time from death and can t relent for every job the stars drop on my back.

I turn over A new museum leaf The light is new And right on the spot I was just thinking about A fleet is about to set out On the ocean light Water turns to sky And makes the eye Blend ingredients in a bend Shaped like an ear A new speaker is speaking I hear the words They sound along The halls of the balls I turn to find them As if I knew where to turn Isn't that the sound That's present Isn't that the sound That's gifted Isn't that somethingsomething I'd like to put upon The walls And take down Take apart And put in a mood The instructions to which I say aloud

These New York City Pigeons cooing in the air shaft are responsible for me stubbing my toe spraining my ankle and getting sick on ammonia fumes That pigeon roosting on the clothesline stole my nightgown Those pigeons on the street lamp made me feel foolish while riding in a black car completely splattered with their grey & white poo poo These New York City pigeons are not calm like pigeons of Oxal  in Brazil and do not croon like doves of Zimbabwe New York City pigeons moan strange    low    mournful    quivering cancer-like moans mixed with hungry hyena barks & gulping loss of the forest cries New York City pigeons are not relaxed like pigeons sunning at Marcel Duchamp swimming pool in San Francisco New York City pigeons are not happy like pigeons standing on head of the woman selling bananas on a street corner in Johannesburg New York City pigeons flap viral leather fungus dust from wings into faces then sit on steps vocalizing & waiting for the death of humankind New York City pigeons are not friendly like pigeons eating flaky crescent-shaped rolls at Hotel du Pi mont in Paris New York City pigeons are not content like pigeons posing for photos on arms of men in plaza of Caracas New York City pigeons will lounge on ledges & murmur profanity all day will fight for fucking space in the mating season shit on air conditioners & wipe their asses on windows while big cockroaches suck Sucrets in the dark New York City pigeons are not alert like pigeons sitting quietly on bicycles in peace memorial park of Hiroshima New York City pigeons roll their pearly eyes inflate their throats and defecate on the shoulders of pedestrians New York City pigeons have no love for crumb-throwing pigeon lovers & no year of the pigeon is celebrated at least not for these New York City Pigeons

like a single branch of ash honed to the handle of an axe and made to take the hand of a woodsman as he throws his body weight to fell all the ash has sown, I turn your words although the line you spoke was simple

I am born on a Tuesday at University Hospital Columbus, Ohio, USA  a country caught   between Black and White.   I am born not long from the time or far from the place where my great-great-grandparents worked the deep rich land unfree dawn till dusk unpaid drank cool water from scooped-out gourds looked up and followed the sky s mirrored constellation to freedom.   I am born as the South explodes, too many people too many years enslaved, then emancipated but not free, the people who look like me keep fighting and marching and getting killed so that today  February 12, 1963 and every day from this moment on, brown children like me can grow up free. Can grow up learning and voting and walking and riding wherever we want.we   I am born in Ohio but the stories of South Carolina already run like rivers through my veins.  

I can bring a halo into the night cave, quiet with music (do not ask the music), to her shaded there in the moon; her fine spectacles steam their pond rings; her animal eyes fix on the lintel of the door as the wax owl glances back at me. I am her little cotton tree the breeze combs white into a final note, her diminuendo poco a poco ...     Moon-afro, myself outpaces me in wonder of her. She goes off and I seep under the black sprout of her house, to rise a salmon bell on the hill dissolving mild cloud fractals, without grief or malice.

Because I love you, and beneath the uncountable stars I have become the delicate piston threading itself through your chest,   I want to tell you a story I shouldn t but will and in the meantime neglect, Love, the discordant melody spilling from my ears but attend,   instead, to this tale, for a river burns inside my mouth and it wants both purgation and to eternally sip your thousand drippings;   and in the story is a dog and unnamed it leads to less heartbreak, so name him Max, and in the story are neighborhood kids   who spin a yarn about Max like I m singing to you, except they tell a child, a boy who only moments earlier had been wending through sticker bushes   to pick juicy rubies, whose chin was, in fact, stained with them, and combining in their story the big kids make   the boy who shall remain unnamed believe Max to be sick and rabid, and say his limp and regular smell of piss are just two signs,   but the worst of it, they say, is that he ll likely find you in the night, and the big kids do not giggle, and the boy does not giggle,   but lets the final berries in his hand drop into the overgrowth at his feet, and if I spoke the dream of the unnamed boy   I fear my tongue would turn an arm of fire so I won t, but know inside the boy s head grew a fire beneath the same stars   as you and I, Love, your leg between mine, the fine hairs on your upper thigh nearly glistening in the night, and the boy,   the night, the incalculable mysteries as he sleeps with a stuffed animal tucked beneath his chin and rolls tight against his brother   in their shared bed, who rolls away, and you know by now there is no salve to quell his mind s roaring machinery   and I shouldn t tell you, but I will, the unnamed boy   on the third night of the dreams which harden his soft face puts on pants and a sweatshirt and quietly takes the spade from the den   and more quietly leaves his house where upstairs his father lies dreamless, and his mother bends her body into his,   and beneath these same stars, Love, which often, when I study them, seem to recede like so many of the lies of light,   the boy walks to the yard where Max lives attached to a steel cable spanning the lawn, and the boy brings hot dogs which he learned   from Tom & Jerry, and nearly urinating in his pants he tosses themTom & Jerry toward the quiet and crippled thing limping across the lawn,   the cable whispering above the dew-slick grass, and Max whimpers, and the boy sees a wolf where stands this ratty   and sad and groveling dog and beneath these very stars Max raises his head to look at the unnamed boy with one glaucous eye nearly glued shut and the other wet from the cool breeze and wheezing Max catches the gaze of the boy who sees, at last, the raw skin on the dog's flank, the quiver of his spindly legs, and as Max bends his nose to the franks the boy watches him struggle to snatch the meat with gums, and bringing the shovel down he bends to lift the meat to Max's toothless mouth, and rubs the length of his throat and chin, Max arching his neck with his eyes closed, now, and licking the boy's round face, until the boy unchains the dog, and stands, taking slow steps backward through the wet grass and feels,   for the first time in days, the breath in his lungs, which is cool, and a little damp, spilling over his small lips, and he feels, again, his feet beneath him, and the earth beneath them, and starlings singing the morning in, and the somber movement of beetles chewing the leaves of the white birch, glinting in the dark, and he notices, Darling, an upturned nest beneath the tree, and flips it looking for the blue eggs of robins, but finds none, and placing a rumpled crimson feather in his mouth slips the spindly thicket into another tree, which he climbs to watch the first hint of light glancing above the fields, and the boy eventually returns to his thorny fruit bush where an occasional prick leaves on his arm or leg a spot of blood the color of these raspberries and tasting of salt, and filling his upturned shirt with them he beams that he could pull from the earth that which might make you smile, Love, which you ll find in the fridge, on the bottom shelf, behind the milk, in the bowl you made with your own lovely hands.

I wish my frank and open face Held just one tiny little trace Of something that approaches guile. I'd like an enigmatic smile And heavy-lidded eyes instead Of just a regulation head.

Isn t it shocking how he speaks for her? His thin voice wavering across the restaurant   she ll have the cod artichoke bake.she ll have the cod artichoke bake A giggle of  bubbles comes from behind them: a fish tank curtained with seagrass where a seahorse is tying itself to one of those slim, tweedy forms  like a hand shaping itself  inside another s the way my hand tucks into his like a difference pretending it s not.

                                             I A whim of Time, the general arbiter, Proclaims the love, instead of death, of friends. Under the domed sky and athletic sun Three stand naked: the new, bronzed German The communist clerk, and myself, being English. Yet to unwind the travelled sphere twelve years Then two take arms, spring to a soldier's posture: Or else roll on the thing a further ten, The third - this clerk with world-offended eyes  Builds with red hands his heaven: makes our bones The necessary scaffolding to peace.                                              II Now, I suppose, the once-envious dead Have learned a strict philosophy of clay After long centuries, to haunt us no longer In the churchyard or at the end of the lane Or howling at the edge of the city Beyond the last bean rows, near the new factory. Our fathers killed. And yet there lives no feud Like Hamlet's, prompted on the castle stair: There falls no shadow on our blank of peace, We three together, struck across our path, No warning finger threatening each alone.                                              III Our fathers' misery, their spirits' mystery, The cynic's cruelty, weave this philosophy: That the history of man, traced purely from dust, Is lipping skulls on the revolving rim Or war, us three each other's murderers - Lives, risen a moment, joined or separate, Fall heavily, then are ever separate, Sod lifted, turned, slapped back again with spade.

I feel my failure intensely as if it were a vital organ the gods grew from the side of my head. You can't cover it with a hat and I no longer can sleep on that side it's so tender. I wasn't quite faithful enough to carry this sort of weight up the mountain. When I took my vows at nineteen I had no idea that gods were so merciless. Fear makes for good servants and bravery is fraudulent. When I awoke I wasn't awake enough.

           Fresh out of the icebox, this brain looks the wrong way from time to time, and misses the cat stepping by, Gerry on the screen laboring to tell the nuances his pink matter almost notices, he s not my brother, not really my close friend, just my necessary neighbor on a bicycle going by like a whistle from the lips of someone I trust. He has a peculiar skeleton arranged his own way in the mind s pasture. We were as they say  of an age  and so inter- twine somehow, though I wanted to work when he wanted to play. That long nose is in my life and in my writing and so is the Okanagan River. I sometimes get to the river when I am at work, the sun on my back not the ink in my pen. There was, when I was last in the Okanagan Valley, a cat with big paws in the neighborhood, I was told, fires I could see along the hillside, stunning heat from the sky, enough to thaw any brain.

I stand in Walgreens while my mother sleeps. The store is fluorescent and almost empty. My father is ailing in a nursing home, my friend is dying in the hospital. What I want tonight is lipstick. As pure a red as I can find no coral undertones, no rust or fawn. Just red. Ignoring the salespeople, I untwist tubes and scrawl each color on my wrist, till the blue veins beneath my skin disappear behind smeared bars. I select one. Back in my mother's apartment, silence. I limn my lips back out of my wan face. There they are again: smacky and wanting.

At the market today, I look for Pi ata apples, their soft-blush-yellow. My husband brought them home last week, made me guess at the name of this new strain, held one in his hand like a gift and laughed as I tried all the names I knew: Gala, Fuji, Honey Crisp watched his face for clues what to call something new? It's winter, only tawny hues and frozen ground, but that apple bride was sweet, and I want to bring it back to him, that new. When he cut it, the star inside held seeds of other stars, the way within a life are all the lives you might live, each unnamed, until you name it.

Maker-of-sevens in the scheme of things From earth to star; Thy cycle holds whatever is fate, and Over the border the bar. Though rank and fierce the mariner Sailing the seven seas, He prays, as he holds his glass to his eyes, Coaxing the Pleiades.   I cannot love them; and I feel your glad Chiding from the grave, That my all was only worth at all, what Joy to you it gave. These seven links the Law compelledLaw For the human chain  I cannot love them; and you, oh,themyou Seven-fold months in Flanders slain!   A jungle there, a cave here, bred six And a million years, Sure and strong, mate for mate, such Love as culture fears; I gave you clear the oil and wine; You saved me your hob and hearth  See how even life may be ere theeven Sickle comes and leaves a swath.   But I can wait the seven of moons, Or years I spare, Hoarding the heart s plenty, nor spend A drop, nor share  So long but outlives a smile and A silken gown; Then gaily I reach up from my shroud, And you, glory-clad, reach down.

I cannot hold such emptiness  the only meaning, the meaning   we make & the way time tugs the body down, the body named   bone, named brain, the color of dust & tremor, the soft meat   & the bag it lives in. We beg from the body; it shivers &   spits we settle for desire, in- commensurate sorrow, for a life   like too much water, shallow & wide, for enough salt to make a little sea.

All winter she s been growing more powerful. Radiant, says the man at the bar. Voluptuous, says the docent. Nervy, says God. All winter her soul has been juddering. It feels like drinking gold flakes! The word sleeps inside the stone. The wind tongues the underside of the lake. Inside the rifle scope of time, God teaches her Grounding Techniques through his emissary, a Certified Therapist. Beetles bore their dirty traffic into pine trees. God says, You cling to deixis like a life raft. Here, youHere say. Now, you say. All winter, you say, like it meansNowAll winter something, days crossed off your compulsive calendar, wind tied to your wrist like a pet. This dumb hunger for fixity! I made your cells to shed, says God. See them everywhere, everywhere. She bites her lip till it bleeds. Who wouldn t immanentize the eschaton, if they could, build heaven on earth in the backyard? She wouldn t, is who. Day a slit-throated ewe. She wears a prayer around her neck in another language, no clue what it says. Who will translate the prayer? Listen: she loved a happy libertine and thought that was heaven. To ground herself she strips berries from the juniper bushes. Well, says God, Alexander the Great dyed his hair saffron. We are all made fools in this world.

Bored in the balcony reading your novel hoping it will keep me awake    religion was always a blind spot    with my Sunday headache waiting for the service to finish so I can retrieve my little chorister, no god in us but song, while pale important teenage Sophia in blue head chorister ribbon, face dumpy as a Flemish burgomaster, bosses littler kids and loves leading them expressionless in paired rows from the choir stalls, holding the processional cross high, shushing and huffily eyeing them for babyish disregard of cleanly neatness, my own chorister dripping orts of tissues she stows in her sleeves for sniffles, in the choir room struggles out of her ruff ringed dark brown inside from years of child chorister sweat, hair oil, dead skin. Me: Your other ruff was white and clean!Your other ruff was white and clean! Her: Sophia said it was too big.Sophia said it was too big. She gave me this one instead. I showed her it was dirty and tight. She said  deal with it. I think Sophia changed since she went to high school.I think Sophia changed since she went to high school. Service over, ruffs and black robes dangling awry from a clutter of hangers, restored to bright colors the kids bang out swinging doors to shout among gravestones, delicate stems of ruffless necks bare to autumn sun, leaves hurrying out of trees, leaving Sophia alone striving with their robes, sighing out her burdens in a way she could only have learned from a mom.        I sang twice in church when I was a kid. First time with Katrina and Dona    Dona and I white, Katrina black   we called ourselves the Albanettes, mostly sang strident show-tune medleys, jingled-up folk songs    one day were messing out carol harmonies at Xmas in a nursing home, the inmates nodding, tapping, sleeping in their chairs when Katrina said come to my church,come to my church, they never heard singing like this. At Katrina s storefront the praying, swaying and testifying rose up as we opened our mouths to twine our voices so they burred and shone together like silver spoons then guitar, drums, keyboard shimmerchords surrounded and supported our Gloria,GloriaEchoing our joyous strains, Glo-o-o-o-oriaEchoing our joyous strains, Glo-o-o-o-oria the first time I felt sex in my sweat, the congregation clapped rhythm and counterpoint R&B-ish shivers and thrills.& Dona s single mom came along to drop us off but stayed the whole service, amazed and beside herself dabbing fingertips into her hair criedthank you thank you for your hospitalitythank you thank you for your hospitality I have never been so ... so ... ... so ...  the same smell in her sweat, embarrassing us, squeezed in at the end of the pew. The second time, the Albanettes and whole community choir sang Messiah at the Catholic cathedral from beginning to end;Messiah while the solo basso rolled out Thus saith the lordThus saith the lord sounding like Paul Robeson doing Ol  Man RiverOl  Man River and snow came down outsideand I will shake all nationsand I will shake all nations Dona, Katrina and I couldn t, could not stop giggling, was it the little girl down front with her mouth wide open gawping lustless love at the basso, we giggled harder, was it the river pouring from his mouth, hard to stay soundless as he rumbled, our giggles birthing new giggles till we sweated and wept our mirth, our noses gushed, our bodies shook... whom ye delight in; behold, He shall come ... ... whom ye delight in; behold, He shall come ...        Sophia s mom stops me exiting to sayYou re doing the right thingYou re doing the right thing bringing up your child in the church. I cough into a tissue.We have not loved You with our whole heart;We have not loved You with our whole heart; we have not loved our neighbors as ourselves, I think the communal confession goes, not that I was listening. The morning s scripture lesson: raising the citywide minimum wage. Not that I was listening. Though I agree. If I kept singing maybe I could keep you here. The phrase has dark in front of it, darkness after it, dark riddled through it like whatever isn t sparks in a bad connection. Do you mind I put your death in the poem. You can put the wife from hell in your stories.All the women in my stories are the wife from hell.All the women in my stories are the wife from hell. If I kept singing I could keep you here.We re atheist, in it for the music educationWe re atheist, in it for the music education I don t explain to Sophia s mom, my Sunday headache lifting, my book closed on my finger, my particular chorister running the graveyard outside the church among stones of colonists   low humps crumbling to soil   climbing the cenotaph dedicated 1971 to Wabash, Piankeshaw and six other chieftains who gathered, 1793, in the city, to negotiate against George Washington s land-stealing treaty, whereupon, dying of smallpox   some people think the chiefs were only invited because the white men knew they were likely to die of white man disease   were interred unknown places in our churchyard, graven image of their frilly headdresses signaling tribal-spiritual affiliation. Me, to my husband, 30 years older:I m afraid I ll lose you, to death or divorce.I m afraid I ll lose you, to death or divorce. Him: You d rather I divorce you? or die?You d rather I divorce you? or die? Me: Divorce of course, we could stillDivorce of course, we could still talk to each other, and laugh.Comfort ye, my people ...    Comfort ye, my people ...     my chorister daughter pretending a basso, chin shoved way down into her neck to manage it, up on the graveyard wall on the far side, and lonely Sophia in the shadowy indoors, unsnapping the ruff of a straggling treble chorister, stroking it neat, gently folding it away as her tired mother nags hurry, hurry up please.please

In the perfect universe of math it s said the world s eternal aberration. In fact, we should be less than dead,   math itself disrupted for matter ever to be read as real. A thought so hard to fathom that The NationThe Nation in its article on math has said   we lack the right imagination: the human head will not subtract itself from the equation, zero out the eager ego to be less than dead.   Did the numbers hunger for mistake, for fun upend themselves to recalculate our infinite extinction? And was existence meant for all, since it could be said   without our numbers others might have thrived: the black rhinoceros, shortnose sturgeon ? Articles of horn and scale both less and more than dead,   figurative dreams that now haunt us in our beds. Memory s another flaw in our equation. Was it The Nation?The Nation I forget. Regardless, I know that someone said in a perfect universe, we d all be dead.  

My doctor's packed the place for years because he's known for making huge things sometimes disappear. His routine is predictable, effortless. Pick a number, any number: he's pointing to his framed pain scale. He pauses for effect. The six second sequenced faces are a kid time-lapsed  at a magic show gone wrong. Onstage in Vegas once, the rare white tiger snapped. Inexplicable: my numbers creeping up each week. My doctor backs out quickly, as if dragged off in some beast's jaws.

Feeling rich for one moment for using money as a bookmark Feeling deceitful for making public some opinions while neglecting others Feeling disordered at the sight of three statues conspiring in a row Feeling insufficient for having a lukewarm reaction to news Feeling important for having been offered a seat at the table Feeling apologetic for nonetheless tuning out an argument Feeling blue for identifying some people who don t respect you Feeling like a knife slipping into a pool of water for bearing  disagreement Feeling redundant for moving in a similar direction as others Feeling angry for imagining the opening of the passage yet  unopened for you Feeling antisocial for declining further missives from home  

Terrible are the rose names ...     Stakeholders in a tradition of  Grande Amore  and  True Love  (one carmine, the other blush ... ), their aims are, for the most part, scattershot.  Mothersday  and  Playboy,   Senior Prom  and  Let s Enjoy  vie with a lyrical  Lady of Shalott,  while a flyweight  Pink Knockout  comes  Outta the Blue  to mock  Honey Perfume,   Pillow Talk    jock Cupid wielding clout. Then maybe a puckish curator pairs  Las Vegas  with  Nearly Wild,   Buttercream  with  Julia Child,   Aloha  with  Hello, Neighbor ...          Misenus, son of Aeolus, god of the wind, don t you think it s bad form to practice trumpet on this platform, what with the dentistry squeal at construction site decibel levels of braking blade shaving molar steel, dropped-in blare of delays and arrivals squelched against granite, at close intervals, while you riff on  Over the Rainbow    ? You received some negative attention from Triton, after blowing his conch so loud you inadvertently entered yourself in an unwinnable contest; now, stuck in a twenty-first-century translation of hell, you press the stops, and for an obol prepare our burial in an infinite axial scroll with a tinier and tinier turning radius, as if we were those hordes, the unsanctified, who shoved one another along the Cocytus, none led on to the golden bough by Venus s semaphore, the unloved rock doves, whom Virgil treats so gently in the Aeneid. Aeneid

Even city planning. Yesterday, for example, with its unexpected view of posterity draped loosely between high-rises    unlike the composed street raised to stoop level like a stroller. No moon but clearly under some pressure to form one in quick stages, while being careful to avoid what intervenes with commas, speech tags, etc. Architraves pre-everything. So that time, or what s left of it, prior to displaying its secret life (which wasn t so secret to begin with) waves everyone and everything away, including the burnished sills and their plants lithographed with evening plus the host of secondary qualities that rush in on the least pretext, a new unit of space, some jazz below, mouths to feed ... wrinkles alchemy prints on studious foreheads. Or indeterminacy. What did Rimbaud know about ageing anyway?   More than you think. Leaving (you might say) a colorful flag without a flagpole, the parade route all but painted over like the history of unopposed takeovers and the real wrinkle is that nothing is there for the taking no matter how it appears. Shuffling off to Buffalo or wherever they go to fill the intemperate, intermediate needs, while the wisps of grass that inevitably push up between cracks look digital and the buses squeeze their passengers to left and right like shifts in basic economic priorities. Have I mentioned noodling, as opposed to  raptures of attention ? The effect without a cause   unless you re one of those who find that notion empty of meaning    not only in connection to instrumental music ( I wasn t playing anything I was just noodling ) but phenomena in general, potential as well as kinetic, from Y. Zowl singing  to a small guitar  to our near-absorption in textures, weathers, (invasive) ellipses, sublimation, etc.? To sum up: it s not that the telegram to Elizabeth Bishop was  undelivered but that the dead   if not busy licking their wounds    are absorbed with themselves, as we must appear to the perceptive hawks. Dark gray, dark green, beet red all over, but also (hence the notion of collateral damage when it applies) thickness tout court.tout court

I saluted the famous river as I do every year Turning south as if the plough steered, Kicking, at the start of a new furrow, my back To the shady purple gardens with benches under plum trees By the river that hunts between piers and sandbanks    I began threading the long bridge, I bowed my head And lifted my hands from the wheel for an instant of trust, I faced the long rows of vines curving up the hillside Lightly like feathers, and longer than the swallow s flight, My road already traced before me in a dance   Of three nights and three days, Of sidestepping hills and crescent lights blinding me (If there was just a bar counter and ice and a glass, and a room upstairs: But it rushed past me and how many early starts before The morning when the looped passes descend to the ruined arch?)   She came rising up out of the water, her eyes were like sandbanks The wrinkles in her forehead were like the flaws in the mist (maybe a long narrow boat with a man lying down and a rod and line like a frond of hair dipping in the stream) She was humming the song about the estuary, and the delights Of a salt ocean, the lighthouse like a summons; and she told me:   The land will not go to that measure, it lasts, you ll see How the earth widens and mountains are empty, only With tracks that search and dip, from here to the city of Rome Where the road gallops up to the dome as big as the sun.   You will see your sister going ahead of you And she will not need to rest, but you must lie In the dry air of your hotel where the traffic grinds before dawn, The cello changing gear at the foot of the long hill,   And think of the story of the suitors on horseback Getting ready to trample up the mountain of glass.  

Fog day, give us the sun. But the particulate hangover from Stuttgart s bad days obscures. The weather of modernity. The lady s tattooed musculature is what comes of getting too close to the angry father. Decode. He d been left behind. We get on well now. Punk diadem, scales unjust, iced and fired, messianic Virgil and the golden aspiration for one wandering around in diaphanous red, the zoo escapees looking on hungrily but nervously. And a little bit curious. Even at the height of Coondle heat when I rose before dawn to catch the sun s origins I realized I was looking into the core of purgatory. The house would stretch and crack with heat but then, as the sun played its games with the horizon, the curve of the hill, the house was at its coolest and retracted so a glass pane shattered into the corridor. The conspiracy of good and bad. Who is to choose? I don t mind the walk, negotiating rough ground, but when jerks are taking potshots at you, it makes it impossible. I don t use a GPS. A bit of bush knowledge, a lot of common sense. But this is T bingen and we re nearing our time: the songbird insurgence and weather vanes and swans, the bare branches and killed trees, the welcome and hatred of refugees, questions of which fruit will ripen or mature or fall or offer seed when its time comes. I study H lderlin manuscripts with a friend and we will rewrite  Half of Life  upside down. The inversions of travel and temporariness and permanence. Tracy speaks to me from across the old town. It hasn t rained today but the Ammer River is still swift outside this window. Classic. Stock epithet burnout. Behind the glissade of faces the goings home. Vengeance lurks therein. Such beautiful youth. Floating on Friday night promise. This brutal God watching on. In store. Adorning places of worship. I apologize for the distractions. Wondering while I write.

The earth has feelings some killed others in its mud and it has lots of mud The earth builds a scrapyard, a sequence of them to tell of this, a seam on its embalmed glabella future galaxies caress The earth knows Andr  Breton, compiles ingenuous personalities in its fevered correspondence Out of its winding sheet rolodex the earth erodes another name, your name Beware, the earth prepares to say one final time, construction eclipses It hoped to say nothing further and then was disappointed, its hope misplaced it knew deep down Say more, you say, the earth had hoped you would Express as little as possible with your furniture, find the little that is as near to nothing as can be The monuments unpictured drift up like watermarks through the odor of the lens You make things happen all the time, says the earth, take my advice look the other way

   i   Mother says there are locked rooms inside all women; kitchen of lust, bedroom of grief, bathroom of apathy. Sometimes the men - they come with keys, and sometimes, the men - they come with hammers.  iiii  Nin soo joog laga waayo, soo jiifso aa laga helaa, Nin soo joog laga waayo, soo jiifso aa laga helaa,  I said Stop, I said No and he did not listen.StopNo  iiiiii   Perhaps she has a plan, perhaps she takes him back to hers only for him to wake up hours later in a bathtub full of ice, with a dry mouth, looking down at his new, neat procedure.  iviv   I point to my body and say Oh this old thing? No, I just slipped it on.Oh this old thing? No, I just slipped it on.vv  Are you going to eat that? I say to my mother, pointing to my father who is lying on the dining room table, his mouth stuffed with a red apple.Are you going to eat that?  vivi   The bigger my body is, the more locked rooms there are, the more men come with keys. Anwar didn t push it all the way in, I still think about what he could have opened up inside of me. Basil came and hesitated at the door for three years. Johnny with the blue eyes came with a bag of tools he had used on other women: one hairpin, a bottle of bleach, a switchblade and a jar of Vaseline. Yusuf called out God s name through the keyhole and no one answered. Some begged, some climbed the side of my body looking for a window, some said they were on their way and did not come.  viivii  Show us on the doll where you were touched, they said.Show us on the doll where you were touched I said I don t look like a doll, I look like a house.I don t look like a doll, I look like a house. They said Show us on the house.Show us on the house. Like this: two fingers in the jam jar Like this: an elbow in the bathwater Like this: a hand in the drawer.viiiviii   I should tell you about my first love who found a trapdoor under my left breast nine years ago, fell in and hasn t been seen since. Every now and then I feel something crawling up my thigh. He should make himself known, I d probably let him out. I hope he hasn t bumped in to the others, the missing boys from small towns, with pleasant mothers, who did bad things and got lost in the maze of my hair. I treat them well enough, a slice of bread, if they re lucky a piece of fruit. Except for Johnny with the blue eyes, who picked my locks and crawled in. Silly boy, chained to the basement of my fears, I play music to drown him out.  ixix   Knock knock. Who s there? No one.xx   At parties I point to my body and say This is where love comes to die. Welcome, come in, make yourself at home. Everyone laughs, they think I m joking.This is where love comes to die. Welcome, come in, make yourself at home        

So today, yet another Guyanese will try to run the border dressed in a dead housewife s hair all they ve recovered since her disappearance in a downtown shopping mall. An  incident,  the paper says. Another  routine occurrence   wresting my trust from the publicans assigned to keeping us safe, whole. Rather: vow to stay vigilant against the maiming that waits in each landscape, even in this mundane procession of muddy spring days. To see the tenacity of rooted hair for what it is: an illusion as fleeting as courage. To keep the meat between one s ribs from being torn, to keep the hard marble of the cranium covered with its own skin. To stay vigilant. To watch the signs of violence stirring even in one's own machine. To keep both breasts attached and undiseased. To keep the womb empty; and yet to keep the organs living there from shriveling like uneaten fruit, from turning black and dropping. And not to mistake the danger for a simple matter of whether to put the body on the streets, of walking or of staying home ; there are household cleansers that can scar a woman deeper than a blade or dumdum bullets. The kitchen drawers are full of tools that lie unchaperoned. Even with the doors and windows bolted, in the safety of my bed, I am haunted by the sound of him (her, it, them) stalking the hallway, his long tongue already primed with Pavlovian drool. Or him waiting in the urine-soaked garages of this city's leading department stores, waiting to deliver up the kiss of a gunshot, the blunted kiss of a simple length of pipe. But of course I mean a larger fear: the kiss of amputation, the therapeutic kiss of cobalt. The kiss of a deformed child. Of briefcase efficiency and the forty-hour workweek. Of the tract home: the kiss of automatic garage-door openers that despite the dropped eyelid of their descent do nothing to bar a terror needing no window for entry: it resides within. And where do we turn for protection from our selves? My mother, for example, recommends marriage  to a physician or some other wealthy healer. Of course it s him, leering from his station behind her shoulder, who s making her say such things: the witch doctor, headhunter, the corporate shaman, his scalpel drawn & ready, my scalp his ticket out.  

Lose a brother? Lose a pa? At the sound of the tone it will be exactly sayonara. Meet me in the lobby of Casa Purgatoria when it's Turkish bath hour.  We will sweat  out  whatever  the  fuck it is that's unclean and inside us, at least inside me.  Round and brown and getting cool. Vestigal  feeling in the monkey I cut off myself.  Having  stood beside the  catafalque  to  nominte  him for  heroism I did not expect a nom- ination  for  tragedy  to be so rapidly forthcoming. You saw as well as I  did  how  the  hot  afternoon  was  grateful  to  him for bequeathing himself  to  its  mysterious  finitude.  Dry  and  bright and breezy and the hours were honey.  The shadow of a fully leafed-out tree over our white  knuckles.  I  would  have  liked  to  have been holding beads to show how humble  and elated I felt.  I talked of farce as if it were life. Life itself seemed  more than ever  high hips in a  form-fitting sheath. I  can  be  restfully  subdued  by  the  sight  of  long  undulant  fingers, please  let  me  show you  my entire body!  Every time  you see me re- call  my  neck  sinews,  my  piano-string  forearm  tendons,  my pneu- matic  sexual flesh,  and  my mild and erotic  eyeballs forget the shy- ness  about me  that  you can't understand.  You can easily read in my  eyes  how  voluntary  my  fantasies are,  and how flattering they are to you. Body. B-o-d-y.  Ah, the bruises.  Later for laying flowers, says the body.  O  body,  O  tough  stuff,  O  body  capable of sleep.  I break  the shaft  of  my  spear  over  my  knee  and kiss a patch of concrete.  Then from  hands  and  knees  I rise  to my full height.

Rinky-dink kale feeding guinea pig Fonky bag uh cornchips plastic shoe Wearing crinkle-fry bastard . . . up in here TONIGHT Wanchu go head mister plinth butt And roll ya dumb ass a lavender Cigarette don't make me slap a freeze On this wart-o-matic bullshit Get me a rancorous tinker toy N turn this motherfucker out

In the dream I enter him I      the eater of numbers the black-lipped barcode of cost have come for him because he owes me. He owes me the broken machine the bone structure gone limp over leg of time. I      irreverent as safe sex breathlessly whispering this is not a threatthis is not a threat but a promise for the love of the wolf on lockdown. WhyWhy the long face? the horsefly asked the muzzle as though to suggest these mouths we have are traps, bold-faced lairs of brotherhood. Cover your eyes and you ll miss it, you ll miss this squalid city growing legs from its scalp. His kneecaps jerked beneath the sheet, skinned eyelids rolling back to the /     Point to where he touchedPoint to where he touched you on the doll, he asked. c mo se dice  everywhere ? c mo se dice  everywhere ? He will pay for this, the heroic antihero announced, the vulture- masked man surveying the damage the clinical centaur now spooked his hind legs reared as if to say demons fear beasts in twos. Rage bound tight in synthetic skin /     bound and ridden in dialect at an angle of consumption. After feeding he asks, What s the damage?What s the damage? The legless caterpillar humping itself forward /    toward my mouth, rending the lip a cleft palate, twisted up from firegold sand, a habit of creature malformed. The men laid flowers on my mother s tongue, they come see about me. These flowers are edible men /      flowers of sawtooth bone.

Nurses and nuns   their sails whiter than those of the yachts in the bay, they come and go on winged feet, most of them, or in sensible shoes. July, and I should be climbing among stones or diving, but for broken bones, from the rocks below.   I try to read a new novel set aside; but a sword-swift pain in the left shoulderblade, the result of a tumble in Sheridan Square, makes reading difficult: writing you can do in your head. It starts to rain   on the sea, suddenly dark, the pier, the gardens and the church spires of Dun Laoghaire. You would think it was suddenly October as smoke flaps, the yachts tack violently and those caught in the downpour run for cover.   But in a few minutes the sun shines again, the leaves and hedges glisten as if with dew in that fragrant freshness after rain when the world seems made anew before confusion, before pain; and I think of you,   a funny-face but solemn, with the sharpest mind I know, a thoughtful creature of unconscious grace bent to your books in the sun or driving down to New York for an evening on the town. Doors open wherever you go in that furious place;   for you are the light rising on lost islands, the sp ir-bheansp ir-bhean the old poets saw gleam in the morning mist. When you walk down Fifth Avenue in your lavender suit, your pony eyes opaque, I am the one beside you, and life is bright with the finest and best.   And I have seen, as you have not, such is your modesty, men turn to watch your tangle of golden hair, your graceful carriage and unhurried air as if you belonged to history of  her story , that mystery.her You might have been   a saint or a great courtesan, anachronistic now in some ways, in some ways more up-to-date than the most advanced of those we know. While you sit on your sun-porch in Connecticut re-reading Yeats in a feminist light I am there with you.  

FullFull               the blow to a gong  gone blind                         with the sight of white Silk, O milk             of my reason                          sun reseen in My mad mad mirror.              GibbousGibbous   Sense Less science: the   Wish-apparition of a perfect fact.               As thought, the war Of one upon one.    HalfHalf   Half a mind almost mine.   Whole              fragment, I am A being from another word.    CrescentCrescent   Bow bent back to what release?               My lone line, the join of all I am not.   A minor truth betrays A major one  A lore             for the lyre. For it is written: liar with a why.liarwhy  NewNew               Calling all coincidence, I will Deem the dark my day.   Yet if I say             I am lying, I am lyingI am lying To you now.   O zero raised to zero I am lying with you now.  





jazz is underwater vodou atlantis mute aborted ultrasound fetal fish in flood   haiti's first cousin forcibly kissed by a hurricane called katrina. hot winds come one fat tuesday. old levee leak explodes. fixing funds gone to homeland security. soldiers stationed in iraq. said,   jazz is underwater days like laissez-faire manna does not fall saviors do not save   hunger prays to rage for resilience, improvisational genius implodes, anarchy duets with despair. bassist fingers loot nimble like a deft pianist. said, vodou atlantis mute. the fragile eardrums of instant orphans get inundated with someone else's mama's soprano saxophone screams.   (meanwhile televised tenor voices report monotonous drone to drown out) the deafening beat of funeral marchers can't swim. bloated trumpet carcasses, a singer swallows human sewage. her last note, a curse on america. aborted ultrasound. cacophonous   warnings scatter brains. pedestrians hear calls to evacuate, escape, and think, how fast can on-foot run? the poor, the weary just drown. abandoned elders just drown. people in wheelchairs just drown. the sick in bed cannot leave. their doctors stay behind too. new emergencies engulf the e.r. swamped hospitals ain't hostels, ain't shelters.   resources slim like hope. nurses stay behind too. their loyal partners will not leave. ill-fated rejects just drown. said, fetal fish in flood. outside, a breaking willow weeps like a father on his rooftop, murmuring his wife's last words: clutch tight to our babies and let me die, she had pleaded, you can't   hold on to us all, let me die. she, too, like jazz, is underwater. her love, her certainty, will haunt him. their children's survival, a scar. sanity also loses its grip, guilt-weight like cold, wet clothes. eighty percent of new orleans submerged. debris lingers, disease looms. said, days like laissez-faire.   manna does not fall. shock battles suicide thoughts. some thirsty throats cope, manage dirges in cajun, in zydeco. out-of-state kin can't get through. refugees (refugees?) remember ruined homes. a preacher remembers the book of revelations. still saviors wait to save.   and the living wade with the countless dead while a wealthy president flies overhead up where brown people look up where brown people look like spoiled jambalaya, stewing from a distance in their down-there distress, said,   he's free  high up far up  vacation fresh eagle up, up and away from the place where our protest sound started, still sings. american music gurgling cyclone litanies man cannot prevent, the man cannot hear.

You look sleazy tonight ma said. Cheap, I said. I m doin cheap. You got any idea how much it costs to do cheap these days? To do gold City of Paris three-inch platform sandals and this I. Magnin snake dress? I m doin cheap. You look like a bird, she said a Halloween bird with red waxed lips.       In high school you could either do cheap or Shakespeare, college prep or a pointy bra, ratting a bubble haircut with a toilet brush. I was not allowed to do high school cheap; I did blazers and wool skirts from the Junior League thrift shop. In high school it was don t walk in the middle of Richie, Leelee, and the baby, you might come between them. You look like a skag wearin that black-eyed makeup, people are gunna think you re cheap. While I poured red food dye on my hair to match my filly s tail for the rodeo, ma beat her head against the wall, she said tryin to make me nice. I tried real hard, but the loggers, the Navy guys, they always hit on me. Cause you re an easy mark, ma said. And I played guilty, I played guilty every time. But now, I said now I m doin cheap.

 Syntopicon: an Index to the Great Ideas Missing ScenesThe Tempest  No Use   Therapies A to Z

Pattern or absence of pattern, the way a jet flies into blankness yet leaves a clear trail, I expect time to reveal an underdrawing, hatching of shadows, some rough plan visible through another spectrum of light.                  Once, at an ophthalmologist s office, through an accident of mirrors, I saw the interior of my own eye, the retina s veins like roots or a web, and then again   ten years later, this time in an astronomy book galaxies, clusters of galaxies, superclusters of galaxies strung out strands of a cosmic web, the redness of that image, the light extending like roots 13 billion years in every direction.                  Michelangelo could see a figure in a block of stone, waiting to be freed. I want his vision when I look in a mirror, his mathematical principles for depicting space, his ability to translate three dimensions into stone. First I m in two dimensions, a photograph glued to the glass; then three I m somewhere between the glass and the background. All my houses, friends come and gone. How would he sculpt me? How far out of the stone have I come?  

Remington Rand patents a process awake. Behold: In grids of radio tubes Baal quickens. He looks with eyes of spy planes; he assembles hydrogen arms into normal-form games; he reads the cards scored with information and speaks the probable outcomes of elections. Young Baal began a paper chess machine, the residue from finite states of play. He becomes the liquefaction of those rules, learns it's more than structure symbols want. His thinking labors over knots of entailment, spans terms that signs bind like lesions. Struggling to imagine the scent of mint, he devils himself sleepless with opaque questions: What did there recognize in cloud faces as telegraphed through thought the sky distorts? These patterned shreds of spent thunderhead mime the low entropy of his little grammar. Baal listens to grasp his own encoding slurred through exact impairments of the brain. The cunning daemon fears his self diffuse beneath what renders ark to him aware.

Where there s smoke there are mirrors and a dry ice machine, industrial quality fans. If I ve learned anything about the present moment        But who doesn t love a flame, the way one leaps into being full-fledged, then leans over to chat       Already the light is retrospective, sourceless, is losing itself though the trees are clearly limned.

It is important to remember that you will die, lifting the fork with the sheep's brain lovingly speared on it to the mouth: the little piece smooth on the one side as a baby mouse pickled in wine; on the other, blood- plush and intestinal atop its bed of lentils. The lentils were once picked over for stones in the fields of India perhaps, the sun shining into tractor blades slow moving as the swimmer s arms that pierce, then rise, then pierce again the cold water of this river outside your window called The Heart or The Breast, even, but meaning something more than this, beyond the crudeness of flesh, though what is crude about flesh anyway, watching yourself every day lose another bit of luster? It is wrong to say one kind of beauty replaces another. Isn t it your heart along with its breast muscles that has started to weaken; solace isn t possible for every loss, or why else should we clutch, stroke, grasp, love the little powers we once were born with? Perhaps the worst thing in the world would be to live forever. Otherwise, what would be the point of memory, without which we would have nothing to hurt or placate ourselves with later? Look. It is only getting worse from here on out. Thank God. Otherwise the sun on this filthy river could never be as boring or as poignant, the sheep s brain trembling on the fork wouldn t seem once stung by the tang of grass, by the call of some body distant and beloved to it still singing through the milk. The fork would be only a fork, and not the cool heft of it between your fingers, the scratch of lemon in the lentils, onions, parsley slick with blood; food that, even as you lift it to your mouth, you never thought you d eat. And do.  



First, Beulah has no idea where the damn grape is. She just got her manicure and frankly could care less. She does find the cocky Cockney cute. But, so does that glittery Lil and well--- It s Lil s Big Show.   Lil has blood on her hands, and rubs in the almond scented lotion, while she waits for that peeled grape.   Beulah pours a large portion of gin and recalls the Minstrel shows, Bessie Smith, chicken dinners in a picnic basket, and a guy named Roy. He was no prince, but a king of the bedroom rambles.   Elsewhere, boots are beating the ground, leaving bloodied feet and untended harvests as glass breaks across the faces of Polish Jews and the Spanish Republicans fight black clad insurgents. More boots, pretty, shiny, well-made boots.  until the war  says Tom in  The Glass Menagerie.The Glass Menagerie. When America  sits  in a  dark room  and watches  until the war .  Death s stench rolls across the Atlantic, a powerful fog.  Meanwhile,   The dapper heroes roam landscapes as fake as their stage names and the heroines roll up their stockings or sweat the chorus line   But not Miss Lil and the disobedient Beulah, both swaying large hips and rolling brown eyes, generously Awaiting a man s tongue sucking   For Gertrude Howard (1892-1934)

Walking among my own this windy morning In a tide of sunlight between shower and shower, I resume my old conspiracy with the wet Stone and the unwieldy images of the squinting heart. Once more, as before, I remember not to forget.   There is a perverse pride in being on the side Of the fallen angels and refusing to get up. We could all be saved by keeping an eye on the hillall  At the top of every street, for there it is, Eternally, if irrelevantly, visible     But yield instead to the humorous formulae, The spurious mystery in the knowing nod; Or we keep sullen silence in light and shade, Rehearsing our astute salvations under The cold gaze of a sanctimonious God.   One part of my mind must learn to know its place. The things that happen in the kitchen houses And echoing back streets of this desperate city Should engage more than my casual interest, Exact more interest than my casual pity.  

My own heart let me more have pity on; let Me live to my sad self hereafter kind, Charitable; not live this tormented mind With this tormented mind tormenting yet. I cast for comfort I can no more get By groping round my comfortless, than blind Eyes in their dark can day or thirst can find Thirst's all-in-all in all a world of wet. Soul, self; come, poor Jackself, I do advise You, jaded, let be; call off thoughts awhile Elsewhere; leave comfort root-room; let joy size At God knows when to God knows what; whose smile 's not wrung, see you; unforeseen times rather   as skies Betweenpie mountains   lights a lovely mile.

Where am I going today if I'm going anywhere at all without my soul, that bird with its unreadable, unheard name having wandered off again, convinced that it is more than just a word  do we travel far from each other today?  me in my pre-owned Mazda with my radio full of wasps' nest news, my Peshawar & my Rupert Murdoch, all my guilty Murdochs  my destination like a homestead made of fallen maple leaves, the three leaves that form a tipi tipped together by a 5-year-old's hands, a dwelling place, where if I wanted to I could rest my human rights while my soul travels far from its base, lost for a while on its own highly privatized trip, the idea of living forever an idea that is not an eternity at all for my wanderer but a wish the bird has to fly brocaded by herself within the borders of a tapestry, far from some witch queen's cackle, far from that witch who has disguised herself as a sparhawk woven out of dark thread by a Flemish peasant's hands                how far is too far, you ask?  a little foolishness goes a long, long way, I'd say; a lot drops dead in its tracks.

You never asked to be a master and God knows (if She would only say so) that I never asked to be a slave. Position papers, grocery lists rain down like ticker-tape on my long-march procession past where you cheer me on, waving from the wistful side of let's admit it  barricades. You're tired of living without any joy. You think you're going crazy. You need my friendship. You're afraid to demand the right to be afraid. You're trying very hard. I know that, and you can't imagine how I wish it were enough. I need to sleep. I never asked for this; you never asked. Our twenty-five inch son whimpers in the night and my breasts hurt until I wake myself and feed him. He never asked for anything at all. We all want just to be a little happy. Listen, I see an older me, alone in some room, busy on the telephone dialing all my terrible truths. This thing has never let me live as we both know I might have; yet I see this thing can cut me down on some street or podium tomorrow  or just let me live, alone. Our child looks back and forth from your face into mine, and laughs. You worry about us, wondering if something within us has broken. You hold my body as if it were glass that will cut you. I'd stop this if I could, believe me, my beloved. I'm dying of bitterness. I love your forehead. Did I ever tell you that?

M loved the little house she shared with her mum, its magnolias and mansard roof. Inside, the smell of molasses and ginger had sunk into the timbers. Water mumbled from a hand pump, not a faucet tap. Music murmured, not from a radio, but from a soft piano. All was washed to softness the sheets, the table linens. Even the gold rims on the old dishes were brushed down to a blur.
     M had been a surprise late baby, and her mother was almost the age of a grandmother. There were only the two of them plus Maugie, their cat.
     M grew up thinking she understood her mum. But in fact she only understood her in daylight. The night world was where mum paced with her mountains of money worries. Down the hall M blissfully slept, and down in the basement Maugie moused, bringing her prizes up to the landing so M and Mum could find them first thing in the morning.
     And in the morning light Mum s money misery vanished. She never spoke of it. But when Mum got sick, her worries magnified. Her illness brought the night world to daylight, though she still managed to hide it from her daughter. Mum could no longer hope for a miracle. Unbeknownst to M, just before Mum died, the ancient lady up and took misfortune into her own misguided hands. She sold their home to the neighbors who had always coveted it.
     Why didn t she tell me? M plagued herself with questions all through the small funeral she and her mum were the last of their line and said to her distant cousins and her friends: She never ever mentioned money! Lawyers, real estate agents, and the neighbors of course were summoned. But the deal was done. Though M harbored murder in her heart for those greedy neighbors, she couldn t get the house back.
     It s all MY fault I should have known, M moaned.
     It took a long time for her to settle these affairs. She d taken a leave from her job at the museum, but eventually she had to go back to work. She and Maugie went to the only place M could afford to buy, a small but gleaming condominium. How could she transfer doilies and dusty velvet couches with broken legs into this glare? What was home any more? She had an iron bedstead, not a sleek futon. Of course Maugie kept finding her way back to the old homestead, and M had to keep quashing the mayhem in her heart as she retrieved the crafty little animal from that basement now full of the neighbor s traps instead of mice.
     Up in the condo, M s dreams began. Each night she dreamed of a ruined house. Mornings she woke to a smell like something left in an oven too long, a whiff of burnt molasses. Sometimes in a dream a window without a wall fell to the ground in mockery. Night after night in her sleep M shouldered mountains of blame. But then came morning.
     All she could do was embrace the day. With her long shapely arms, she put on her makeup, donned her mackintosh, and struck out for the museum, determined to muddle through.
      It s not my fault, I know,  she said to McM, the man who occupied the next desk.  I just miss my home.  He offered her a meatloaf sandwich. She said,  I never knew my mum, after all.  M s dreams went on mortgaging her nights. When she startled awake, there was only Maugie at the foot of the iron bedstead squeaking an unsatisfactory plastic rodent, and a monstrous stink of burnt molasses and cat pee.
     M decided to bake. Using her mother s measuring cups, she chased the aftermaths of the dreams away by spicing the smells. With cinnamon, with allspice, with vanilla and cardamom, she made muffins, mousse, and meringues in the open-concept kitchen. She used all her mother s bowls, and all her mother s spoons, to expunge the smells and she almost did.
     Meanwhile, Maugie knew whenever workmen propped open a staircase door. The cat would slip into the hall, then escape down the stairwell through the service door. And M would get a call at the museum from the mingy mean-spirited neighbors.
      And what am I going to do with Maugie?  M moaned to McM.
      Your cat is lonely,  he said.  Does she have service potential? 
     Maugie would be tested. McM agreed to help.
      The minute McM walked into the combo of gleam and old wood and velvet and iron, the marvelous smells wrapped around him.  You ve been baking,  he murmured approvingly,  in your farmhouse in the sky.  But M was busy wrangling Maugie into the carrier.
     Shortly the cat was deposited on the welcoming laps of ancient ladies in wheelchairs. That champion purr eased the ladies  hearts. Maugie aced the test. Seeing the ladies, something in M eased, too.
      My mother is a mystery I may never solve,  she said to McM on one of their lunchtime trips to the old ladies. Maugie now went willingly into her carrier.
     And so the bright weekday activities wore down the mountains of dreams. Blame became a molehill. M s nightmares became so predictable they were almost friendly. Metamorphosis set in. McM lingered when he held M s coat, and she lingered as he slipped it on. Their hands met when they put the cat carrier into the car. But these were the gestures of daylight.
     Thinking she was ready to brave the evening light, M had made the mistake of inviting McM for Saturday dinner. When the day came, she lay in bed with a fever, vacuuming was abandoned, her mahogany hair unwashed. Though the mushroom soup gurgled on the stove and the mousse slept in the fridge, the main course had never been started. She left a message canceling.
     McM arrived anyway with merlot and magnolias. He merged into M s mess. It smelled of cough drops and kitty litter and dust and the fragrance of a woman in a slept-in nightgown. She slid beneath layers of consciousness like the layers of the blankets he straightened for her. And then balancing two hot toddies, fully clothed, he climbed into the bed. Maugie obliged him with a space.
     M was too weak to protest. She woke and drank and woke and slept. At midnight M sat up and slurped the mushroom soup held by McM. Magnificent . . . 
     And then she sank. That night of course she dreamed of a house, but this house was merely old, not ruined. It was the homestead, magnolias laden, sheet music still in the piano bench. When she woke, she smelled McM, still fully clothed at her side, his glasses on the floor, batted about by Maugie. Nothing smelled burnt. Unlike her mother, M didn t believe in miracles. She believed in muddling through. Slowly something had risen in her, like those moons you sometimes see in an afternoon sky, night inside the persistence of day. M sat up in bed, hugging her knees, looking at McM sprawled beside her. The house at last is inside me, she thought. I ve finally moved. 
 Why didn t she tell me? She never ever mentioned moneyIt s all MY fault I should have known, The house at last is inside me, I ve finally moved. 

There is an old statue in the courtyard that weeps, like Niobe, its sorrow in stone. The griefs of the ages she has made her own. Her eyes are rain-washed but not hard, her body is covered in mould, the garden overgrown.   One by one the first lights come on, those that haven t been on all night. Christmas, the harshly festive, has come and gone. No snow, but the rain pours down in the first hour before dawn, before daylight.   Swift s home for  fools and mad  has become the administrative block. Much there has remained unchanged for many a long year   stairs, chairs, Georgian widows shafting light and dust, of the satirist;   but the real hospital is a cheerful modern extension at the back hung with restful reproductions of Dufy, Klee and Braque. Television, Russian fiction, snooker with the staff, a sifter of Lucozade, a paragraph of Newsweek or the Daily MailNewsweekDaily Mail   are my daily routine during the festive season. They don t lock the razors here as in Bowditch Hall. We have remained upright   though, to be frank, the Christmas dinner scene, with grown men in their festive gear, was a sobering sight.   I watch the last planes of the year go past, silently climbing a cloud-lit sky. Earth-bound, soon I ll be taking a train to Cork and trying to get back to work at my sea-lit, fort-view desk in the turf-smoky dusk.   Meanwhile, next door, a visiting priest intones to a faithful dormitory. I sit on my Protestant bed, a make-believe existentialist, and stare the clouds of unknowing. We style, as best we may, our private destiny; or so it seems to me   as I chew my thumb and try to figure out what brought me to my present state    an  educated man , a man of consequence, no bum but one who has hardly grasped what life is about, if anything. My children, far away, don t know where I am today, in a Dublin asylum with a paper whistle and a mince pie, my bits and pieces making a home from home. I pray to the rain-clouds that they never come where their lost father lies; that their mother thrives;      and that I may measure up to them before I die.   Soon a new year will be here demanding, as before, modest proposals, resolute resolutions, a new leaf, new leaves. This is the story of my life, the story of all lives everywhere, mad fools whatever we are, in here or out there.   Light and sane I shall walk down to the train, into that world whose sanity we know, like Swift to be a fiction and a show. The clouds part, the rain ceases, the sun casts now upon everyone its ancient shadow.  

Thank you for your time, Mr. Patterson. I understand you were rather close to Mr. Joplin.Yes, you could say that. Knocked around together for years. But I am curious . . . what is it got you so bent on knowing Joplin's story?Well sir, his tunes . . . they have given me great comfort in times of need. They saved me in times voracious grief. They help me remember who I am. Where I m from. Who I was.Yes. The music will do that take pain and pour it someplace else for a while.I believe that his story is higher . . . deeper than the sound of his music. If people knew the sheer will that was put into each note, they might know better how those tunes, that music, let this country talk itself through its own ugliness. I want to uncover the details of his process. I ve been talking to the people who knew him most intimately, the ones best able to carry his memory forward. So here I am, putting his story together so I can better know . . . ours. I m hoping you will help me, sir.I see. (Laughs)
     You got high expectations, you know that? You don t always get the story you want. It don t always show the way to where you think you re going to. And then too, it don t change nothing if it s the past. And ain t nothing sound more like the past these days than some old ragtime tunes. Some things you just can t get back.(Laughs)I m here for the story as it happened. That s all I need, Mr. Patterson.Well. You seem to know a thing or two about loss. How the world don t slow itself one step. Whole world seems sold on racing away from whatever it s ever been. Hooked on leaving its past behind without a trace. Especially after war.That s true, sir.I see that you ve seen your share.I have, sir. With the 369th.Took a chunk out of you, huh?Yes sir. Belleau Wood.Damn. You ain t that one that won the Croix de Guerre, are you?No,sir. Just one that got a bit . . . rearranged.Well, then. Let me pour us a toast . . . Tell me. What story you want to hear? What you need to know?I want to know about his unpublished work. You helped Mr. Joplin write his final scores?Well, I was with him. I was in that room with him for days weeks. He was pressing up on them keys like he was trying to look into a mirror and find his own face. Blood gone almost all the way bad by then.Syphilis?Yeah. That bad blooded dog. It bit him up and spat him out left nothing but dry bones and a crop of scattered nerves just enough for him to try and stutter out some last scraps of sound. It was rough, boy. Rough.Did he get much done?Well, in a seeming sort of way. Problem was, he couldn t hardly start one rag before he would get up and go to the next. Was all broiled up in each one start one sounding like morning, get halfway through, and end up switching to some chords that left a midnight taste in your mouth. Start another that blew through your bones like a winter frost, then he d take a break and come back burning up them keys like August in a cotton field.
 Did he finish any of those compositions?Can t tell you. Might have but most of what he did finish he ended up callin child s play. But they weren t any child s play, I ll tell you that. Not any child I ever met. I know  cause I heard him play it all together one time, just before he lit that match.
 You mean that he played the whole thing at once? As one piece?The whole thing. Took all them raggedy pieces and tied  em all together with a loose string of phrase all syncopated up like a gold pocket watch. A dozen dozen little song parts ticking away, all coiled up spitting and spinning. Times falling away and then coming together at the last minute . . . goodness.Did it have a name?Can t say it did. Only saw him play it that one night. And everything he was working on was changing titles all the time, anyway. One hour it d be the If Rag, then turn around and it d be Lost Boy. Next hour it d be the Magnetic Rag. Remember Me. Tremble Hand. Hallelujah. Bad Blood. Palms Down. Syncopated Glories. Morning Burl. Seem like they was all getting born up at once everything he d had me writing down for all those days and nights. I couldn t rightly say that all of it was nice sounding. But some of it stuck to me so hard until I could never shake it off. Or maybe it was the way he was playing it like he was staring down a well. And then sometimes he d just stop and look at his palms, like he d brung up a last drink of water. Then he d just splash it all over that piano.
     But I can still hear parts of it in my head. (Plays)
     That was some good stuff right there.  Cept he d played it all stiffed up, bar by bar, most the time.
Till that one last night.If Rag, Lost Boy. Magnetic Rag. Remember Me. Tremble Hand. Hallelujah. Bad Blood. Palms Down. Syncopated Glories. Morning Burl. (Plays)
     Were you there that night?I was there. Well, naw I wasn t there. I was supposed to be. See, he had just played that thing. Had played it all out, till there wasn t no more. He was sweating and heaving at the end like he d been running for everything he d ever lost. I remember once he looked up like he d found some secret in the music, and then he did something he d rarely do he sang a little with the tune, like I m in the wind,  baby. I m in the wind, darling. He was just twirling them keys all around, you know. Just twinkling up those high notes with big bashes of bass. Then too, I remember there was this one part in the music where he sounded like he d wandered somewhere deep in the notes and couldn t find a way back. Well, he found his way back alright. But he just wasn t the same no more.I m in the wind,  baby. I m in the wind, darling. What happened? How was he different?Well, let me see . . . You ever have someone seem all never-beaten all their life, so never-beaten till it s like they was never weak? So strong till the day you come to know how weak they are that s when you see how you never knew their strength? Well, I had been knowing him for days, weeks, years. All the time knowing  bout his strength knowing he would be hitting those keys to the end, even when he was out of it, he d walk out with his head up. He d seen worse. Lot worse.
     See, sometimes he d be out on the road, playing his set everything that had got his name on it, his bread and butter. He d be up there playin it all grand and professor-like, kinda stilted up and slowed down so that the audience could hear every note shimmering in its own museum. He d love each rag like it was the children he never got to see grow up he d be keepin them all orderly and polite, straining up their voices not so much as they d break, but enough to hear them bend up a little into hope, no matter how sad they might be. But never rushin nowhere. Folks was all okay with that back when he first started playin that Maple Leaf and such.
     But it changed. He thought putting those pieces on paper would help hold them the way he heard them make them stay proper and well behaved.Maple Leaf I imagine he was quite eager to get his work published in order to get compensated.Yeah, he was glad to see it out in the world. See, he wanted to leave his sound behind him . . . but see, it didn t work out quite exactly like that. Once those rags were on paper, every ten-fingered bowler-wearing stud would put his hands all over those tunes. Walk them slow at first, till they learned all their ins and outs. They was polite with them tunes, till they figured out how to roll  em out a little faster, and then make  em strut and swagger more with each stride. Next thing you know, they was cakewalking them rags up and down that keyboard like a pimp in the tenderloin. Their fingers would work  em more faster, more prettier than they was supposed to be all slicked up and leaned back and sideways steppin hustled up and tricked out like something illegal, ill tempered and ill-begotten gained.
     And started to be like every time he went to a new town, there d be some light-fingered hustler out to bootstrap himself up, using Scott like a ladder. Come up onstage after Scott all friendly, then play his pieces all to pieces. I mean snapping those rags with a shoeshine boy s spit and polish, trying to make the best tip of the week by showing the master how to work his own business. He d say in his polite little professor tone,  Very nice, but too fast, friend!  and they d just laugh. He would laugh with them a little through his frown, too because what else could he do?
     And what s make it worse is that Scott couldn t keep up with  em. That ol  dog syphilis had him by the throat, and had gnawed up almost everything he could do with his hands . . . and every year it got worse, till he would come into town and some folks would think he must ve been a faker, askin how could the great rag man be all dusted up and unpolished like that? This be Scott Joplin? This?
     But he never stopped, brother. Never stopped. Would always shake it off, even though you know he d been shook. Always had a plan an opera, a show . . . , This?Like right? Isn t that what kept him going?Yeah, trying to get that opera up and runnin kept him going for a long time. Years, maybe. But everybody got limits. And that night, he knew he d just . . . run out of time. He d played that patchwork blanket of rags for hours and hours that night, all up and down the fingerboard till the air was about beat out the room. And he was breathless. When he looked up you could see there weren t that many breaths left for him here on this earth, and when I saw his face . . . boy, I just had to ...
     I had to walk away for a while. I went out that door. Got the night air. Cleaned myself off with wall beneath the streetlights.So . . . you left the building .Yeah. Only left about twenty minutes or so, walking round the block. Came back and there was a glowing off the roof of the building. Ran up all them stairs, thinking the building was on fire, maybe one of them johns had dropped a cigar on the roof. Got there to see him standing next to this big old metal trash can, all blazed up with his songs. He must ve put some kerosene on them  cause they was blazed up pretty high and hot I could feel the heat off those rags damn, all them beautiful rags could feel the heat from ten feet away. And I could see Scott on the other side. His face all lit up, his hands trembling and holding one last stash of scribbled up music.
     You can t stop something you know is gonna happen anyway. And then, you still gotta try. And I did. I tried to fix my mouth to talk at him, talk him down from all that mischief the sickness had put up in his brain. But what could I say? All the things you would say in the same situation. Don t do it, Scott your voice on paper, your work, think of your bloodline of sound all burning up, man . . . Who gone show them, man? People need to know . . . 
     You know what he said?Don t do it, Scott your voice on paper, your work, think of your bloodline of sound all burning up, man . . . Who gone showthem, man? People need to know . . . 
     What did he say?It was almost like he knew it was coming. This giant hand of wind came right over us from the river. And he threw them rags all up in the air and into the palm of that hand, and it made a fist and smeared his music all over New York. All them notes all scattered over Manhattan like so many raindrops. All them notes burning up in smoke.
     What d he say? It s all in the wind, Sam. It s all in the wind.
It s all in the wind, Sam. It s all in the wind.

I used to be a dog. What kind? Oh, a mongrel. Nothing poncy like the black cocker spaniel called Bonzo I had as a child. And certainly not one of those four-footed, aloof snakes that go by the name of greyhound. I remember each and every one of the lice that lived on me.Where did I live? In Sicily, where the sun shines like a fried egg every day of the year. I had the nose of an angel   I could smell porcini fifty trees away. I knew the man who would start a fight with my master the moment he walked in the bar door. I drank a saucer of red wine every day. I loved eating the butterflies that floated past me   one pounce and they were gone. And they were delicious. Better than the bones of a donkey whose meat provided salami for my master and his family. The boy was very good to me   he used to take me down to the sea and let me splash in the waves; then I d come out onto the sand, barking, and I d shake all the seawater onto him, wetting his clothes. He loved laughing, and I loved barking. Those were the days.I never saw a kennel. My home was an old blanket under a gnarled vine that had been there since Dante wrote his only sestina, in homage to the troubadours. The heat was often scorching. The boy found it funny to put a straw hat on my head, one dyed in the colors of the Italian flag. I was up early, out scouting for rats to frighten away.  I once peed on a hedgehog to see what it would do. I ran along the clifftop, barking at the wheeling seagulls, and at the fishing boats they flew above. I sometimes ate my master s leftover spaghetti bolognese in the taverna. My tail would wag like a fan revolving from the ceiling. I was taught party tricks that I d be asked to do when the grappa was being downed. I d lie down on the floor and die, to great applause. I d sit up and beg, to coos and laughter, and I d be rewarded with a sausage, and those were sausages to swim the Adriatic for.I d sometimes go down to the harbor to look for an attractive gray bitch I liked the smell of. I d have to fight off other dogs, but I was good at that. I ate one of their ears. Once I followed her onto a boat that was heading out to fill up with fish. I had to swim back and I lay on the sand and slept. When I got home my master whipped me. I ran to my blanket, whimpering.I was once brought to a circus, and into the tent of a one-eyed woman with black hair who had a pet parrot. I barked at it, and the parrot expertly returned my bark. I lay on the multi-colored mat and observed the strange bird who observed me. I was glad to leave that tent.I enjoyed hearing the boy play his flute in the evenings. I heard those notes flutter up into the air, and I tried to see them, but never could. I never stopped trying, though.The one thing I couldn t eat was cheese. The few times I tried it I vomited. On the first occasion that happened I tried to eat it again. If I got the chance now I d manage it, I m sure. Who would not like to be a dog in the sun? A dog in the sun, like I used to be, long ago. It was an honor.

I want to read at the white house. I want to read poems at the white house. I want to read poems at the white house with all the pomp available. With celebratory music and all my beloveds watching. With Baraka and DiPrima and Roque Dalton behind me I want to read at the white house. I want to read poems at the white house wearing my favorite clothes probably a hoodie or perhaps my Belgian suit. Belgium is a failed state in the heart of Europe which is something to aspire to. I like Belgium and one day I might like to read poems at the palace of the nation but for now I want to read poems at the white house. I want to read poems and sing karaoke and I will probably tell a few nervous jokes. It will be like all the other readings. We will be there together. I want to read poems at the white house and then like any house reading we will all clean up together. We will clean up the mess we have made together. All that rubble and all those ashes. These are my conditions.

Sometimes I wish that I were dead     As dead can be, but then again At times when I've been nicely fed     On caviar or guinea hen And I am wearing something new     And reassuring, I decide It might be better to eschew     My tendency to cyanide.

                                                   Miles of them grow in my carry-on and travel with me across continents but the customs officers are suspicious they eye my old suitcase and ask me to open it                                                   Pickles? they ask sniffing deeply                                                   Pickles? prodding a packet or two say Sure ma am you ve got no jeera or chilies?Sure ma am you ve got no jeera or chilies? (now they ve learned the Hindi word for cumin so the new trick is to joke with us) And one time                                                   I saw three burly officers question an elderly couple disheveled as I was from 20-plus hours of travel from Kolkata and as disoriented (and yes as usual all the usual  foreign  suspects are sent along to  Agriculture ) and they poked around in their overstuffed bags (where some rice fields appeared but they couldn t see them of course) and                                                       one officer said Duck? Bombay Duck?Duck? Bombay Duck? It s a fish?? Dried fish your son wanted? Sorry no fish allowed or birds (The officers looked at each other again and again: expressions priceless) So another time I land                                                      at Detroit airport and I shake my head at the silver-haired officer say Sir, no, no pickles meat or cheeseSir, no, no pickles meat or cheese I buy them here at Bombay Grocers and Patel s (give them a sweet Colgate smile)Yes, yes, sweets, only made of lentil No dairy, no dairyYes, yes, sweets, only made of lentil No dairy, no dairy The red-gold cardboard boxes of sweets he can see but not the rice sprouting beneath the young green shoots                                                  No our rice fields he will never see                                                  we carry them wherever we go

i d rather have an agog  for a heart a djembe for a heart gramophone for a heart bison bone for a heart dandelion spore for a heart sweet cream butter for a heart i d rather have a mason jar for a heart an ashtray for a heart a plate of liver for a heart lawnmower for a heart jezebel for a heart   instead of this flesh & blood which mars my sheets instead of this archive that clogs my toilet instead of this flea-bitten attic full of raccoons instead of this envelope that arrives already open instead of this light bulb that rattles on the inside instead of this tv box that draws attention on trash day instead of this wart that only responds to rain instead of this colander that never catches the grit   i d rather have a heart born of the lust between a sonnet & a blues song a coleridge-wild weed hoochie coochie heart a we real cool heart aboard the impossible spawn of slave ships an undying, maroon eternally brown in the black hills heart i d rather have a heart that beats that beats that beats that beats that beats  

A grand piano wrapped in quilted pads by movers, tied up with canvas straps like classical music s birthday gift to the criminally insane is gently nudged without its legs out an eighth-floor window on 62nd street. It dangles in April air from the neck of the movers  crane, Chopin-shiny black lacquer squares and dirty white crisscross patterns hanging like the second-to-last note of a concerto played on the edge of the seat, the edge of tears, the edge of eight stories up going over it's a piano being pushed out of a window and lowered down onto a flatbed truck!  and I m trying to teach math in the building across the street. Who can teach when there are such lessons to be learned? All the greatest common factors are delivered by long-necked cranes and flatbed trucks or come through everything, even air. Like snow. See, snow falls for the first time every year, and every year my students rush to the window as if snow were more interesting than math, which, of course, it is. So please. Let me teach like a Steinway, spinning slowly in April air, so almost-falling, so hinderingly dangling from the neck of the movers  crane. So on the edge of losing everything. Let me teach like the first snow, falling.

The guardian angel sits in the tree above the black lip of street the man walks down. He calls the man Cargo.Cargo The angel sees a pinewood box in place of the man, and the street he walks is a boat, the hull like a coal crater. Somewhere in the real world there is such a boat and box. The angels call these overlays dreams,dreams and believe they crop up because angels can t sleep but want to    space falls apart when you have unlimited time.        The cargo is rattling in the boat. Maybe it s just the waves, maybe it s rats. What s the difference? Either way: it s the box. The angel sends the man a happy vision from his past   the time he fed birthday cake to his goldfish after an unsuccessful party. The angel thinks he s applying lemon oil to the creaky, wounded wood of the box. He knows it s palliative, but it s beautiful.       The man reaches the end of the street. He s a sick man and he starts to ponder death as he often does these days: All of death is right hereright here   the gods, the dark, a moon. Where was I expecting death to take me if everywhere it is is on earth? At life s close, you re like the child whose parents step out for a drive    everyone else out on a trip,else but the child remains in the familiar bed, feeling old lumps like new in the mattress   the lights off    not sleeping, for who can sleep with the promise of a world beyond the door?       That night the child dreams he s inside the box. It s burning hot, the heat coming from bugs and worms raping and devouring one another. He starts the hard work of the imagination, learning to minister to the new dream. Perhaps all that s needed is a little rain    for everyone to drink and have a bath. Outside: a car humming, somewhere, his mother s singing.

It's not about the sex, really, it's not the ache of the bruised nipple or the burn left by his two-day-old beard in the crook of my neck where the pulse is taken, it's his breathing when asleep that draws me near. When I was seventeen, I'd check beside me, hope I hadn't rolled and squashed flat my one-year-old brother. His sigh on my ear, the rise and fall of air beneath his ribs, was a miracle to me. The nightly surprise of what I saw under the bulb's dim glow: I saw the small heart beating like wings unfolding in the body. Here, with this man, ideas of flight return.  

The television set hung in its wire-net cage, protected from the flung bottles of casual rage, is fetish and icon providing all we want of magic and redemption, routine and sentiment. The year-old tinsels hang where an unclaimed no-hoper trembles; fly-corpses cling to the grimy flypaper. Manhattan snows swarm on star-boxed waters, steam trails from warm subway ventilators . . .  Welcome to the planet, its fluorescent beers buzzing in the desolate silence of the spheres. Slam the door and knock the snow from your shoe, admit that the vast dark at last defeated you. Nobody found the Grail or conquered outer space; join the clientele watching itself increase.  

Look, we have made a counterpoint   of white chrysanthemums, a dauntless path   of death-will-not-part-us petals and revering light;   even here, even here   before the once-wolfish ovens, the desecrating wall   where you were shot, the shrike-stern cells   where you were bruised and emptied of your time-bound beauty    you of the confiscated shoes and swift-shorn hair,   you who left, as sobering testament, the scuffed   luggage of utter hope and harrowing deception.   Come back, teach us. From these fearsome barracks   and inglorious fields flecked with human ash,   in the russet-billowing hours of All Hallows,   let the pianissimopianissimo of your truest whispering   (vivid as the crunched frost of a forced march)   become a slowly blossoming, ever-voluble hearth   revealing to us (the baffled, the irresolute,   the war torn, the living) more of the fire   and attar of what it means to be human.  

Though I have never caught the word Of God from any calling bird, I hear all that the ancients heard.   Though I have seen no deity Enter or leave a twilit tree, I see all that the seers see.   A common stone can still reveal Something not stone, not seen, yet real. What may a common stone conceal?   Nothing is far that once was near. Nothing is hid that once was clear. Nothing was God that is not here.   Here is the bird, the tree, the stone. Here in the sun I sit alone Between the known and the unknown.Though I have never caught the wordOf God from any calling bird,I hear all that the ancients heard. Though I have seen no deityEnter or leave a twilit tree,I see all that the seers see. A common stone can still revealSomething not stone, not seen, yet real.What may a common stone conceal? Nothing is far that once was near.Nothing is hid that once was clear.Nothing was God that is not here. Here is the bird, the tree, the stone.Here in the sun I sit aloneBetween the known and the unknown.

In a room more chicken coop than room, I rent a fan that feels on my face like sound. Low traffic from San Fernando, named for a king who became a city, a valley, a saint. We are meant to repeat his name. Instead I say prickly pear, a cactusprickly pear which spreads its many-paddled hands into the space around itself. No pears. I call Mom to ask what the latest austerity measures mean. Some ants on the wall make their way from one unseeable point to another; the banks have closed. I tell her to barter; barter what, she says. An acquaintance posts  Tourism: The Best Way to Be an Ally to Greece  as if in each tourist s pleasure bloomed a charity. Mules clabber down the stone paths loaded with grapes to make next year s wine, if the tourists come back next year, and we hope they will. I say we, but I m closer to they. Living temporarily in a neighborhood named for the happy, who were who exactly? I grow a little stiff with, a little lean with, a little faint with, a little worn with seeming. I must need to conquer my mind. The roses dead because of drought because whoever lives here cares enough to let their roses die. I must need to conquer the notion anything needs conquering. Something in me can t tell what belongs. The ants for whom anything is a street. What sounded like a gate opening was eucalyptus branches dragging themselves along the tin roof. A yellow butterfly that has no interest in me. I have no interest in kings.

 Good Barber of the Pea!  I exhumed, high into the vag where the barber keeps his pea     Good Sprout!  His mouth, his gray, hunted tongue, always in the distance     No use denying we master the particular service we deny ourselves. In the shade of this pea (the sum of his shade and the gavel flexing above his head) I will become a milliner to cover what work I ve done. Or else, I ll begin anew at the infant chin, where nothing grows but chins! Outside, snails, vines, surpass me and must   gaining pews upon pews. But don t think for a sec I don t know the way out of here, that release is one hair   spiral stair   top of which cleavage evaporates 

Now as the farmer sits at his accounts Reviewing fleeces neath deciduous beeches And notes in red contented ink Net profits of his quite impossible serenity; As graded apples marketably beautiful Into the bushel-baskets sink And trussed hay to the tin roof reaches, And where red tiles through darkening trees are reared A whole year's work is sold in sacks of meal; Now suddenly running Drops like a sprig Of oak in a gale on the neck The little wriggler, Vindictive-legged cunning, Drops like a fleck Of blood on a finger ring Crooking in his sting. It wriggles and stops, Wriggles and turns Through copper ferns Through stubble of crops Into the garden of his most impossible serenity. Chrysanthemums Wilt in alarm As dangerous comes Its arching arm A probable harm Nearer to his impossible serenity. Brambles turn sour Berries crinkle All fruits, Every flower, All roots wrinkle: The trees' atour Lapses, and the power Of his impossible serenity Collapses. The scorpion poison grips, its patterns spread Like wine that trickling on a dusty floor Hence and thence makes pellets and canals. Asphodel, improbable, beside the river bed Is found rank ramsons with a garlic smell. And cider in a dirty cask, lovelike, turns vinegar. Where had been pears and pippins, is a row of rotten balls, Globes of mundungus, faced with foul fungus, And locusts swarm to make the end complete. The last bee disembowelled waves its dislocated feet. Diseased the last elm falls, and with it falls The indistinct last glint of Dionysus Lysius. Earth is with scorpions like spiders hung. From every tile and brick they flick Like leaping twisting mixing flies on dung. A pretty virgin makes a pretty shrew, As those lo longer virgins also do, Because they are no longer so, or else because they are. The fracasado, self-considering as from far, By force of self-perverted scales Pities himself for impotence, and rails Oftener therefore: more he pities, more he fails. The scolding wife drives man to keep a scolding whore: If either dies, he grieves because she scolds no more, And scorns the other still because she scolds. The man whose one wife makes him ten cuckolds Wishes the girl were plain: she finds no joys In playing with her multiplicated boys, Wishes herself plain too, to find her joy in one. Whose wife Is dutiful and bashful all her life Thinks he would be happier if she were loved by other men. Surely some wit usurps the throne of Cypris, when Woman so seems what never woman was, For man to caper to as man should not. The golden mean is not. The man of business bonded to his trade Postpones his culture till his fortune has been made. The cultured man to realize his will Can find no means, nor wherewithal to touch His learning, since his culture costs too much. Reformers, visionaries, poets, other such, Because their vision real is, too sane their wit, The multitude they seek to benefit Lunatic calls them: and although they spurn Others' opinions, lunatic for lack of heed they turn, Parodying their visions of perfection. The land, too stupid to desire a change, Too lazy for that mental insurrection, Yet knowing their salvation lies In broader education Like cats enough uneasy to surmise They have the mange, Further enlightenment refuses And its chief men accuses Of unenlightenment, With consequent Stagnation. Over its losses Autumn its mosses Draws: the dormice go to sleep. In the shorter afternoons Determined to forget, the caterpillars crawl Into the weak oblivion of cocoons. To easier life the coward birds have all Flown from the towns and woods and pools: But some remain at large, poor ignorant fools. The bats are wiser, who hang upside down, Less crazily inverted than the town: Snails in cement immure their sleepy souls: Less mad, though timid, are the celibate Ferns that abide the next arriving spring To unroll fronds again, when warblers sing, Meantime intelligently hibernate, And delicately, Up to date. But we as leaves evacuate a lime Cannot deceive ourselves nor bide our time: Forced to retire by buds that seize our place, Self-superannuated, in disgrace, Know but too well that what we most deride In others is the poison on our side, Stung by the poison we ourselves put up Ourselves the poisoned cup We give our intellectual pride To sup. A scorpion drops from a unicorn's nape Into the virgin's lap. A scorpion drops from blood Xanthipp 's tongue And Socrat s though he have wrung A whole night's liquor from a score kulixes And sadly his wine mixes, Drinking all below the table, Wanders, constitutionally unable To drink himself unwise. Yes, even him approaching now to weigh these things The scorpion stings. This belt of fretted stars that so promiscuously plays Upon our eyes, we learn to name them all, Picking our favourites out like horses in a race. But now their steady passages recall How, geared to the years, They tick our lives out: and we cease to see Much hope in false futurity: Instead we falsify stars that have been With promise that we alter since those stars, Raising reality Not in what we see, Nor in what meteors there yet may be, But in fixed stars we would we once had seen.  

I can play songs in my head Yes I can perfectly replicate   (the) full-on orchestral every note (when the lights / do down / in the city) yet I cannot   compose, for example   and though when I was young I believed   that the fullness meant I could recreate the sounds I heard in my head with my mouth   I learned through painful iteration painfully unsatisfactory   shameful the rendition   so partial almost unrelated the qualities are: note tone scale register vocality musicality incapacity painfully shy of representation is there anyone?   who is a record player

Will death be like this? Like waking from a long dream    still held grounded  in the body disremembered? Spinning ceiling, close call? Foolish beating heart? Those trembling aftershocks of some electric message where bone met motion, clamoring in ligaments, that lingering tremolo singing in the ears like doubt, maybe the echo of some unrecognized once-familiar name. Estranged touch of wind over skin, on damp arms the hair not yet laid down . . . Breath's sour fluctuations not quite tamed. Cheeks' flush loosening, a displaced temperature sensed, unseasonal. Flash of light burning against walls, image after image, an eye, a frame, missing there.   Where, searching, searchless, you can't point to or put a finger on, nevertheless an urge   surging in raised fingers. A circle discontinuous, once rounded out by mouth. Throbbing inside the brow, no accessible thought. Specifically   no memory arising from follicles still tingling, the dulling skull heedless,   singed with salty pores. What if it's like this, only without the body?    

A last formality is running late, as a life can't, this hot day. The final ethereal glow of the sun seems to come up from underfoot in this parkland of polysyllabic death.   These deep graves, two this time, neatly cut into the earth, await the arrivals, and two adjacent heaps of damp fertile glebe are half blanketed by reticent dark tarpaulins. After the full moon's first moments of horizon-magnified fact and risen largesse, it has contracted as our heaven has passed it by and now it floats above the crowns of the inky trees and well beyond bare roofs. It has always been an entity born dead not a phantom, as must be this son, a muddy part of whom soared from cratered waste lands far away before landing here, and also this veteran father, whose heart staggered into an ER and failed after he heard what circumstance had done to his one boy.   No horses hearses, the first two cars. A corps of six men  they bear the heavy coffined corpse of the father toward his very small opening in the planet; and six more envoys of duty, with much-practiced attentiveness, slow-step the light son, an imperfect cadaver with handles, to his own last place. White gloves lift up the draped famed cloth, super-striped and starry, from the younger casket, fold it just so  hands with hands over hands in ritual honor, a ceremony neither of mystical creed nor of doubter's midnights then they advance it to the one who remains. She's looking away from her burials, down at the blades of moon grass. She feels no great gut blows from startled convulsive big drums that shake the spirits of mourners, nor any whirring of equally perilous small drums that might reduce the silence. The son is submitted as lifeless organism to dirt; the father s remains descend into his pit alongside, likewise on tightly held ropes men slowly let slip. (In foremost ranks of a final unbecoming these two fell alike.) The ropes snake back up into what's left of natural light  remainder of the ancient calculus of day and night. From a boom box ten paces away, the familiar bugled notes say that the journey of these remains is done. Even if no grief shadows the bugler, bugles do sound it, word it that unacceptable sentence of slow notes.                                 Distant, on overtime, respectful, yet much too near, a stranger waits to start up a backhoe. On such occasions, after courage of soldiers or folly of command or cold wrong purposes among patriarchs, lords, kings, and freed madness in red valleys, mountains, cities, villages, in schools, shrines, sheds, beds, mud-brick hearts, we have offered up our mortally wounded, un- comprehending remembrance. We look down or away and notice the impassive grass under our bloody weight.  

I m so tired of pretending each gesture is meaningless, that the clattering of niu leaves and the guttural call of birds overhead say nothing. There are reasons why the lichen and moss k kau the niu s bark, why this tree has worn an ahu of ua and l  since birth. Scars were carved into its trunk to record the mo olelo of its being by the passage of insects becoming one to move the earth, speck by speck. Try to tell them to let go of the niu rings marking each passing year, to abandon their only home and move on. I can t pretend there is no memory held in the dried coconut hat, the star ornament, the midribs bent and dangling away from their roots, no thought behind the k welewele that continues to hold us steady. There was a time before they were bent under their need to make an honest living, when each frond was bound by its life to another like a long, erect fin skimming the surface of a sea of grass and sand. Eventually, it knew it would rise higher, its flower would emerge gold, then darken in the sun, that its fruit would fall, only to ripen before its brown fronds bent naturally under the weight of such memory, back toward the trunk to drop to the sand, back to its beginnings, again. Let this be enough to feed us, to remember: ka wailewa i loko, that our own bodies are buoyant when they bend and fall, and that the ocean shall carry us and weave us back into the sand s fabric, that the mo opuna taste our sweet.

You ever wake up with your footie PJs warming your neck like a noose? Ever upchuck after a home-cooked meal? Or notice how the blood on the bottoms of your feet just won t seem to go away? Love, it used to be you could retire your toothbrush for like two or three days and still I d push my downy face into your neck. Used to be I hung on your every word. (Sing! you d say: and I was a bird.Sing! Freedom! you d say: and I never really knew what that meant,Freedom!  but liked the way it rang like a rusty bell.) Used to be. But now I can tell you your breath stinks and you re full of shit. You have more lies about yourself than bodies beneath your bed. RootingRootingfor the underdog. Team player. Hook,for the underdog. Team player. line and sinker. Love, you helped design the brick that built the walls around the castle in the basement of which is a vault inside of which is another vault inside of which . . . you get my point. Your tongue is made of honey but flicks like a snake s. Voice like a bird but everyone s ears are bleeding. From the inside your house shines and shines, but from outside you can see it s built from bones. From out here it looks like a graveyard, and the garden s all ash. And besides, your breath stinks. We re through.

When I tell you I love the song  Edelweiss  you have to understand that even though I too am a sophisticate who scorns musicals, I was once a little girl who stood in my grand- father s living room singing, Cuckoo!Cuckoo!Cuckoo! while he sippedCuckoo!  his scotch and laughed at my preciosity. And when I sing the lyrics in your ear Small andSmall andbright, clean and white,bright, clean and white,you look happy to meet meyou look happy to meet me you have to understand  my grandfather only ever had one friend, a jeweler who also drank scotch, and left his $10,000 Rolex to my grandfather, who wore it even though it turned his wrist green, wore it to the funeral, where the daughter sang in her ethereal voice. BlossomBlossomof snow may you bloomof snow may you bloomand grow, bloom and growand grow, bloom and growforever. She couldn t takeforever. her eyes off the casket. You have to understand that my grandfather kept spinning that heavy gold around his wrist, and when he raised his voice to join in, he cried to sing it. Edelweiss, edelweiss,Edelweiss, edelweiss,bless my homeland forever.bless my homeland forever.

Rage is the language of men,           layers of particulates fused.             Rage is the wine                     father pours to the ground                       for men whose time has passed. Rage                     is gripped in the hands             like the neck of a broom held tight. Rage gets stuck in the throat, suppressed.   Rage is a promise kept.  

The flypaper hung from the ceiling cork- screws with the weight of dead bluebottles. Not a smidgeon of dust anywhere, the house burdened  with an unbearable tidiness that means he will not return.

These roads will take you into your own country. Seasons and maps coming where this road comes into a landscape mirrored in these men.   Past all your influences, your home river, constellations of cities, mottoes of childhood, parents and easy cures, war, all evasion s wishes.   What one word must never be said? Dead, and these men fight off our dying, cough in the theatres of the war.   What two things shall never be seen? They : what we did.     Enemy : what we mean. This is a nation s scene and halfway house.   What three things can never be done? Forget.     Keep silent.     Stand alone. The hills of glass, the fatal brilliant plain.   The facts of war forced into actual grace. Seasons and modern glory.     Told in the histories,                how first ships came   seeing on the Atlantic thirteen clouds lining the west horizon with their white                shining halations;   they conquered, throwing off impossible Europe  could not be used to transform; created coast                 breathed-in America.   See how they took the land, made after-life fresh out of exile, planted the pioneer                base and blockade,   pushed forests down in an implacable walk west where new clouds lay at the desirable                body of sunset;   taking the seaboard.     Replaced the isolation, dropped cities where they stood, drew a tidewater                frontier of Europe,   a moment, and another frontier held, this land was planted home-land that we know.                Ridge of discovery,   until we walk to windows, seeing America lie in a photograph of power, widened                before our forehead,   and still behind us falls another glory, London unshaken, the long French road to Spain,                the old Mediterranean   flashing new signals from the hero hills near Barcelona, monuments and powers,                parent defenses.   Before our face the broad and concrete west, green ripened field, frontier pushed back like river                controlled and dammed;   the flashing wheatfields, cities, lunar plains grey in Nevada, the sane fantastic country                sharp in the south,   liveoak, the hanging moss, a world of desert, the dead, the lava, and the extreme arisen                fountain of life,   the flourished land, people with watercourses to California and the colored sea;                sums of frontiers   and unmade boundaries of acts and poems, the brilliant scene between the seas, and standing,                this fact and this disease.                     ______________ Half-memories absorb us, and our ritual world carries its history in familiar eyes, planted in flesh it signifies its music   in minds which turn to sleep and memory, in music knowing all the shimmering names, the spear, the castle, and the rose.   But planted in our flesh these valleys stand, everywhere we begin to know the illness, are forced up, and our times confirm us all.   In the museum life, centuries of ambition yielded at last a fertilizing image: the Carthaginian stone meaning a tall woman   carries in her two hands the book and cradled dove, on her two thighs, wings folded from the waist cross to her feet, a pointed human crown.   This valley is given to us like a glory. To friends in the old world, and their lifting hands that call for intercession. Blow falling full in face.   All those whose childhood made learn skill to meet, and art to see after the change of heart; all the belligerents who know the world.   You standing over gorges, surveyors and planners, you workers and hope of countries, first among powers; you who give peace and bodily repose,   opening landscapes by grace, giving the marvel lowlands physical peace, flooding old battlefields with general brilliance, who best love your lives;   and you young, you who finishing the poem wish new perfection and begin to make; you men of fact, measure our times again.                     _____________ These are our strength, who strike against history. These whose corrupt cells owe their new styles of weakness                to our diseases;   these carrying light for safety on their foreheads descended deeper for richer faults of ore,                drilling their death.   These touching radium and the luminous poison, carried their death on the lips and with their warning                glow in their graves.   These weaves and their eyes water and rust away, these stand at wheels until their brains corrode,                these farm and starve,   all these men cry their doom across the world, meeting avoidable death, fight against madness,                find every war.   Are known as strikers, soldiers, pioneers, fight on all new frontiers, are set in solid                lines of defense.   Defense is sight; widen the lens and see standing over the land myths of identity,                new signals, processes:   Alloys begin : certain dominant metals. Deliberate combines add new qualities,                sums of new uses.   Over the country, from islands of Maine fading, Cape Sable fading south into the orange                detail of sunset,   new processes, new signals, new possession. A name for all the conquests, prediction of victory                deep in these powers.   Carry abroad the urgent need, the scene, to photograph and to extend the voice,                to speak this meaning.   Voices to speak to us directly.     As we move. As we enrich, growing in larger motion,                this word, this power.   Down coasts of taken countries, mastery, discovery at one hand, and at the other                frontiers and forests,   fanatic cruel legend at our back and speeding ahead the red and open west,                and this our region,   desire, field, beginning.    Name and road, communication to these many men, as epilogue, seeds of unending love.  

We come here These little pillars of salt Placed into the hands Of physicians With debt sweats A gross product Of the sex apparatus There are expired teens There are the old That die in the summer The situation When a nation Loses its beloved celebrity It tries to out-mourn one another Extort them of their talent Versions of these chosen ones Hair flowing free and unrestricted Meanwhile The curbs are laced With water soluble prescriptions Running down into gutters Phosphorescent in the streetlight Medications Available in avocado Coppertone Aqua and white I suffer from the occasional Emotionally draining dream about turtles However The simple idea of omnipresent neutrality Is difficult Too much blood Spills in my dreams It s a vascular debacle Mantras and Ak-47s Are boring In the park Getting some vitamin D The sunlight on my blue jeans I m a deadened sapphire Reading Didion A psychic residue of fortune is on me Didion writes,  I have already lost touch with a couple of people I used to be  I can t handle fate The aphrodisiac of lying to myself The battery flavor of anxiety Shooting the messenger Having a god that doesn t  get me 

In post World War II America there were several loosely affiliated, overlapping strands of poets who began publishing poets rejecting the epistemological and anglophile models of W.H. Auden and T.S. Eliot. They were known variously as the New York School, the San Francisco Renaissance, the Beats, and the Black Mountain poets. They came up on the heels of Ezra Pound and William Carlos Williams, and along the spur of the Objectivists, aka Zukofsky, Reznikoff, Niedecker, et al. Robert Creeley was the bridge. He distributed the differences and sounded parallel concerns. He began corresponding with Pound and Williams in 1949. He and John Ashbery were seated two desks apart at Harvard. In Majorca, his Divers Press published Robert Duncan and Paul Blackburn. He typed Allen Ginsberg's Howl, which was then mimeographed in an edition ofHowl twenty-five. At the now legendary and gone Black Mountain College, he studied with Charles Olson and "earned" his successorship. At Black Mountain Creeley edited the Black Mountain Review (initially from Majorca) and picked up theBlack Mountain Review degree he had managed not to complete at Harvard. Over the years he would edit works of Charles Olson and George Oppen (and Robert Burns and Walt Whitman), as well as anthologies of new American writing. His correspondence was carried on at a rate and level not to be believed. The Olson/Creeley letters alone consume ten volumes (if e-mail had been available to those two the number of volumes might have been squared). He wrote tense stories and a superb short novel along with scores of word-perfect essays. Overall he published in the vicinity of seventy books. Checking a familiar book site, 227 titles are instantly identified with his name. His collaborations with artists including Francesco Clemente, Elsa Dorfman, Sol LeWitt, R.B. Kitaj, and Susan Rothenberg were the occasion of fine-edition books and traveling exhibitions. His collaborations with musicians such as Steve Lacy and Steve Swallow were performed for packed, hip audiences and are featured on numerous recordings. He could and did fill Albert Hall, but he had no qualms about reading to a crowd of four. No qualms, either, about talking extemporaneously in lieu of giving the promoted reading. He was not there to accommodate anyone's prepackaged expectations he was there to discover the direction of his own thinking. And in that lies, as he often quoted William Carlos Williams, the profundity.

I. did you say August ponds ought to have been surrounded by September fences? but did you say September fences ought to have been climbed over by October peoples? what did you say for October padlocks that ought never to have been attached moreover to November handcuffs? II. You'll remember us for our dark Hungarian laughter That tickled when it laughed, that dug at the limelight Why, I'll send you a dark silver Hungarian coin From the mines that never saw the light of day yet Why, I'll send you a dime's worth of Hungarian damage That has been done to a cave that is full of Rhapsody Why, I'll send you a silver key to the cave of despair I'll send you a violet tonight, I'll send you a silver sword I'll send you a silver hammer that'll hammer night and day I'll send you a pail-ful of our kinds of blue revolutionary stars. III. Who are you? Weren't you their prisoner in the sedge dark? Where has been your search for freedom? Will you count the trees again in these dense woods Wherever you have been tonight? Will you look backwards where you have been? And tell me whoever you are. What have been your escapes? Nevertheless freedom is as ever an intense girl angel That speaks to me one in the inane wilderness Where has been your phantasmagoria? Are the dark trees at war with the darklike trees? Where has been your light Where has been your swordy well, Where has been your darklike table? Did you ever search for another star?

O father bringing home crates of apples, bushels of corn, and skinned rabbits on ice.   O mother boiling lentils in a pot while he watched fight after fight, boxers pinned on the ropes   pummeling each other mercilessly. And hung on the wall where we ate breakfast an autographed photo   of Muhammad Ali. O father who worshipped him and with a clenched fist pretended to be:  Float like a butterfly, sting like a bee.Float like a butterfly, sting like a bee. O you loved being Muslim then. Even when you drank whiskey.   Even when you knocked down my mother again and again. O prayer. O god of sun.   God of moon. Of cows and of thunder. Of women. Of bees. Of ants and spiders,   poets and calamity. God of the pen, of the fig, of the elephant.  Ta  Ha , Ya Sin, Sad, Qaf. Ta  Ha , Ya Sin, Sad, Qaf.  God of my father, listen: He prayed, he prayed, five times a day,   and he was mean.

12 foxes thumping; rechristened people. The Elizabethan Underworld as a precursor to the furnished. In the year of the calm fox, girls. The heavyweight watch just to see the mechanics of victory, that is, as above, a precursor to a tradition, changed into a cartoon. The furry, soon to be protected from insults, or humor at their expense, in law. The drawn fox, the heavy hippo. Ambush, false witness, poor translation. In the pressure going down, blood, bicep cuff. Correction, the neighbor is ill, a shame about the lion but there remain frequent accounts of premature burials and lack of perspective so unforgivable to transform.

In Phnom Penh s museum, the skulls are stacked in aquarium tanks: grim toys for hooks to ply free from the rubble. Here, each one gets a tag, a mount, a photograph to suggest a life, perhaps a name, might be envisioned. Yet I m more moved by what s anonymous, past; imagine fields of faces sunken with decay, eyes jellied in their sockets, heel meats bruised, bloated in the rain                                          Perhaps the skulls prefer a lack of names as, scrubbed of self and skin, they re trauma s best witnesses: fused by time and pain to one crisis, never to be separated. Lost as men, they become event. in this, they achieve a terrible transcendence.  

I was born in Speckled Eggs Garden. I will die on Broken Egg Farm. I m hopping between them now, I consider everything to be friendly and nothing dubbed. I am a chick with legs and yellow hair. Oh Lord Almighty, creator of all things beautiful and sick, who prefers another life on top of this, who are you to judge? When Adam and Eve vanished solemnly into the dark, shrouding themselves in the forest, I was timid and nibbling and stayed behind, betrayed only by the plucking of my beak upon the ground you so graciously provided (thanks). I did noth with the best, I am nothing now, do ye noth with me or not? Hear me now before I break O Lord of the Margent, Lord of noth and straw and all things sent far, cheerio, sincerely, I sleep on one leg too!

A d nde vamos  where are we going Speak in English or the guard is going to come A d nde vamos  where are we going Speak in English or the guard is gonna get us hermana Pero qu  hicimos but what did we do Speak in English come on Nom s s  unas pocas palabras I just know a few words   You better figure it out hermana the guard is right there See the bus driver   Tantos d as y ni sab amos para donde  bamos So many days and we didn't even know where we were headed   I know where we're going Where we always go To some detention center to some fingerprinting hall or cube Some warehouse warehouse after warehouse   Pero ya nos investigaron ya cruzamos ya nos cacharon Los federales del bordo qu  m s quieren But they already questioned us we already crossed over they already grabbed us the Border Patrol what more do they want   We are on the bus now that is all   A d nde vamos te digo sal  desde Honduras No hemos comido nada y d nde vamos a dormir   Where are we going I am telling you I came from Honduras We haven t eaten anything and where are we going to sleep   I don t want to talk about it just tell them That you came from nowhere I came from nowhere And we crossed the border from nowhere And now you and me and everybody else here is On a bus to nowehere you got it?   Pero por eso nos venimos para salir de la nada But that s why we came to leave all that nothing behind   When the bus stops there will be more nothing We re here hermana   Y esas gentes qui nes son no quieren que siga el cami n No quieren que sigamos Est n bloqueando el bus A d nde vamos ahora Those people there who are they they don't want the bus to keep going they don't want us to keep going now they are blocking the bus so where do we go   What?   He tardado 47 d as para llegar ac  no fue f cil hermana 45 d as desde Honduras con los coyotes los que se   bueno ya sabes lo que les hicieron a las chicas all  mero en frente de nosotros pero qu   bamos a hacer y los trenes los trenes c mo dir  hermana cientos de nosotros como gallinas como topos en jaulas y verduras pudriend se en los trenes de miles me oyes de miles y se resbalaban de los techos y los desiertos de Arizona de Tajas sed y hambre sed y hambre dos cosas sed y hambre d a tras d a hermana y ahora aqu  en este cami n y qui n sabe a d nde vamos hermana fijate vengo desde Brownsville d nde nos amarraron y ahora en California pero todav a no entramos y todav a el bordo est  por delante It took me 47 days to get here it wasn't easy hermana 45 days from Honduras with the coyotes the ones that   well you know what they did to las chicas right there in front of us so what were we supposed to do and the trains the trains how can I tell you hermana hundreds of us like chickens like gophers in cages and vegetables rotting on trains of thousands you hear me of thousands and they slid from the rooftops and the deserts of Arizona and Texas thirst and hunger thirst and hunger two things thirst and hunger day after day hermana and now here on this bus of who-knows-where we are going hermana listen I come from Brownsville where they tied us up and now in California but still we're not inside and still the border lies ahead of us I told you to speak in English even un poquito the guard is going to think we are doing something people are screaming outside they want to push the bus back   Pero para d nde le damos hermana por eso me vine le quebraron las piernas a mi padre las pandillas mataron a mi hijo solo quiero que estemos juntos tantos a os hermana separados But where do we go hermana that's why I came here they broke my father's legs gangs killed my son I just want us to be together so many years hermana pulled apart   What?   Mi madre me dijo que lo m s importante es la libertad la bondad y la buenas acciones con el pr jimo My mother told me that the most important thing is freedom kindness and doing good for others   What are you talking about? I told you to be quiet   La libertad viene desde muy adentro all  reside todo el dolor de todo el mundo el momento en que purguemos ese dolor de nuestras entra as seremos libres y en ese momento tenemos que llenarnos de todo el dolor de todos los seres para liberarlos a ellos mismos Freedom comes from deep inside all the pain of the world lives there the second we cleanse that pain from our guts we shall be free and in that moment we have to fill ourselves up with all the pain of all beings to free them   all of them The guard is coming well  now what          maybe they'll take us to another detention center we'll eat we ll have a floor a blanket toilets water and each other for a while   No somos nada y venimos de la nada pero esa nada lo es todo si la nutres de amor por eso venceremos We are nothing and we come from nothing but that nothing is everything, if you feed it with love that is why we will triumph   We are everything hermana Because we come from everything

I am here for a very particular reason: to buy a 6-pack of beer and berries out of season                         all for you, i did it all for youall for you, i did it all for you     I noticed an oil spill on my drive past the bay, emergency broadcast on the radio  What do you have to say?                         all for you, i did it all for youall for you, i did it all for you     You chopped down the plant that used to grow my pants, resurrected it in Indonesia like a blow-up doll with amnesia                         all for you, i did it all for youall for you, i did it all for you     Poor people once lived here but you flooded the valley with psilocybin carcinogens, and forced the kids into shooting galleries                         all for you, i did it all for youall for you, i did it all for you     You gave poor people jobs then you forced them to act like robots lining up for a real live heart attack, made them take apart their futures then you sold the parts back, repurposed the sutures to close a robocaller s rap                         all for you, i did it all for youall for you, i did it all for you     You got children in slums to make things that break, your unspoken credo   If it lasts, it s fake.      But you were there first when we were dying of thirst, with a pint of chilled water each, for me, my wife and two daughters,     and even a kewpie doll and a tiny stuffed puppy  for my wife some paper slippers, for me, a stuffed yuppie      You saw every decision that I would make first, and you did get there first when we were dying of thirst                         every decisionevery decision                     i make is part yours,i make is part yours,                     every step i take,every step i take,                     i take on your floori take on your floor     You mangled my fingers, polluted my streams, screamed in my face, closed deals over my dreams                        all for you, i did it all for you                    all for you, i did it all for you   (and now it fades out,                       The Commodity Sings to its Beloved  song.                      The Commodity Sings to its Beloved  song. They ll say it was a good idea done wrong   They should have got a bigger budget, done it as a singalong. )  

When I think of the dead, it meansthey re thinkingthey re thinking of me, I delude myself happily, on occasion, assuming the past a thing to cherish like a face surprised I bothered to come at all, given the rain and the long drive. But you were always let s go anyway.let s go anyway The commonest phrase: alive and well. As if we jumped out of a hole to stand here radiant. In the no-name old tapestries, many with halos, a glow or a circle of jagged lines around each head never bowed at the table, simply looking straight on like a mirror gives us back to ourselves. If sometimes the women in those lush hangings so plainly dressed, their rims woven deep and lit, turn sideways, the hills, a blue distance involved    Out there. The one vanished, or just now walking away   

At first, we had ways of talking That filled up the evening Until some things could be said. It was a made-up Situation in which lives could be lost. Whatever that was now grows inside Our bodies a spongy, pulpy cell  Causing pieces of paper we hold In our hands to appear   And disappear. All I ask Is to take me away from this place, To another place, very much like This place, where we can meet And six months later Be married. You laughed and went with me.

The palms are psalms. The nail salons, manicured lawns. This is some phase. The park has been razed. I miss the hip, hours at a clip, their dopey glazed Dolores haze (sorry). I worry about basic stuff: my graying scruff, Ambien addiction. Eviction ...   But there s another story: this site was once a cemetery. In 1888, the late were stirred, disinterred, carted somewhere calm, a nothing place called Colma. By then the dead prohibited in city light. They thought this was all right: the dead have nothing to lose; the dead were Jews. Hills of Eternity, Home of Peace: the dead were put in their place.

        Is she still Faith Franckenstein? Is she still the past somewhere between Frankfort, Kansas, and LA? Le Moulin du Soleil Ermenonville; her mom s haunt with Harry Crosby, winter  29, also haunted, still haunted. Those open fields haunted. The Faubourg Saint-Germain. The Faubourg darknesses and weeping willows, the drizzled cul-de-sacs. Is she still of memories thus deleted, giving her a certain absent aura, tall-shouldered? An uncertain world of make-believe made more believable, I wanna say. Those whims and glossy chance encounters, tossing caution to the wind. As such, a darkened moonless night, down by South Beach sans the Verrazzano, c.  61. We plunged headlong, skinny-dipping in the languid surf with dreams of no tomorrows, no eternities. None but those decades lessened, disappeared. Those moments becoming one less and less. The near-to-next impossibility. The careless and carefree. The half-remembered face. The voice also half-remembered. Her hair way past shoulder-length, soft, satiny. Wordsworth s  emotions recollected in tranquility  tout pass .tout pass  The midnight skinny-dip.

Yes, we'll gather by the river, the beautiful, the beautiful river. They say it runs by the throne of God. This is where God invented fish. Wherever, but then God's throne is as wide as the universe. If you're attentive you'll see the throne's borders in the stars. We're on this side and when you get to the other side we don't know what will happen if anything. If nothing happens we won't know it, I said once. Is that cynical? No, nothing is nothing, not upsetting just nothing. Then again maybe we'll be cast at the speed of light through the universe to God's throne. His hair is bounteous. All the 5,000 birds on earth were created there. The firstborn cranes, herons, hawks, at the back so as not to frighten the little ones. Even now they remember this divine habitat. Shall we gather at the river, this beautiful river? We'll sing with the warblers perched on his eyelashes.

Say what you like about Charaxos, that s a fellow with a fat-bellied ship always in some port or other. What does Zeus care, or the rest of his gang? Now you d like me on my knees, crying out to Hera,  Blah, blah, blah, bring him home safe and free of warts,  or blubbering,  Wah, wah, wah, thank you, thank you, for curing my liver condition.  Good grief, gods do what they like. They call down hurricanes with a whisper or send off a tsunami the way you would a love letter. If they have a whim, they make some henchmen fix it up, like those idiots in the Iliad.Iliad A puff of smoke, a little fog, away goes the hero, it s happily ever after. As for Larichos, that lay-a-bed lives for the pillow. If for once he d get off his ass, he might make something of himself. Then from that reeking sewer of my life I might haul up a bucket of spring water.    Translated from the GreekTranslated from the GreekTranslated from the GreekTranslated from the Greek

When the puppy snarfles for breakfast I wake to the radiator gurgling then feet crunching the reticent snow. Before I was born, Mother sewed her own suits. What do her ashes know?                                            Father shoved snow off the supine roof. Mother crafted Christmas ornaments: glue and glitter and red balls. No tinsel, no angels. Her death started in the living room.                                            For bonsai, pliers the size of a nail clipper, spools of wire and a fist-sized rock. One bore a petite pomegranate, never to eat, not to touch. Her death began with a baseball bat.                                            In the vineyard, he secured the strongest cane from training stake to fruiting wire. Pruning with handsaw and lopper. He d leave a spur for the next season. He shoved her away with direct objects.                                            In a cold snap if one pipe freezes, the rest may freeze as well. Even before the puppy snarfles. Even before a baby brother arrived in the misleading car in Mother s arms.                                                                                     After the war, after she met Father, she smoked cigarettes but didn t cha-cha anymore. She d light up and blow smoke out the apoplectic window. He found the ashes on the sill.                                            Fireflies blinked for mates or prey outside the savvy window of my own first home. On the stereo, a bluesman cried,I need my ashes hauled!I need my ashes hauled! The dress was too smart to wear.                                            I tucked away our baby s pink layette in circumspect mothballs for a christening that never took place. As well, a doll that Auntie crocheted. More than anything, I love tidal pools.                                            I know her ashes are at Father s, lost in his charnel of junk mail. He claims that thieves have stolen that box, his knob cutter and root hook. He says, remains aren t ashes anyways.                                            Winter stripped everything to the limb and dejected nest. No angels, no cre che. I don t know whose recollections are suspect: after leaving Maui, Mother learned to swim. She loved tidal pools more than anything.                                            In my kitchen, the logs blink in the fire   through blinds, the wind blusters and the browbeaten trees creak in the orchard. The rain pours then stops for sun. If he lost Mother s ashes what more could I stand?                                           Omusubi tastes best on black beaches.Omusubi tastes best on black beaches. Since Mother never learned to swim, did she watch her five brothers from a blanket? On the intransigent subway, I don t know if I ve passed my station. (His mother said yes  )yes Iron: I bit my lip again.                                            Mother showed our baby how to sift flour and how to crank an eggbeater. After Father lost her, he barred everyone from the rooms and the yard where at night long red worms slither up from the ground.                                            Her ashes know: before the puppy snarfles, Father shoves snow off the supine roof; for bonsai, use pliers the size of a nail clipper; in the vineyard, the strongest canes; in a cold snap, a hair dryer on frozen pipes; fireflies blinked for mates or prey outside while I tucked away my baby s pink layette. Her ashes know their box is in the living room where she didn t cha-cha anymore. Where has winter stripped everything to the nest? In my kitchen, the logs blink in the fire and I knowomusubi tastes best on black beaches.omusubi tastes best on black beaches. She knew to show her granddaughter how to sift flour.

The barstool's capacious, then ever more enclosed, with every beer, as evening erodes. A few capricious tourists off the cozy track propose unbeaten toasts. He'll soon be going back. Mannequin musicians play mandolins or thumb pianos, bleat out a reggae air on ragged banjos. The booths patter with the local lingo. Smattered English polishes the windows. An amble to the john, the mirror's random crack. The urinal's askew. He'll soon be going back. The minimal solicitudes of seven-minute flirts: blurted-out soliloquies, well-trained parting words. Insert pejorative for natives here, before a sputtered call for one more beer. Dusty carnations; carnival bric-a-brac  long-faded revaltions. He'll soon be going back.

They flared on the sea green of the Subaru that seemed netted under the unleafing maple, a limestone moulage cut from a quarry and cast in immemorial arrest behindPete s Absolute Asphalt truck,Pete s Absolute Asphalt throttling still when I alighted and said, besides, in Aleppo once   to nothing but the wind photographed in sunlight; the pavement s watery brier and children and their ghosts and the air-raid screams of mothers, once, in Aleppo, altered that moment in history when titihihihihi titihihihihi those white houses, stiffened with silence, broke the private change, the public good to dive into pits of leaves.

All this tall grass has ruined my gold acrylic nails & I know something s dead just beyond my window. I grew up with rats running my floorboards & know the smell straining from a body once caught in a trap. In the city what little I have of an ass is always out, a simple wind blow from Marilyn Monroe-ing the street.Marilyn Monroe Here, in all this nature, there is nobody but me & my 5 friends for a week & I promised myself I d be naked but the first day I found a tick clinging to my arm hair for dear life & decided no way I m exposing my pussy to the elements. My love for nature is like my love for most things: fickle & theoretical. Too many bugs & I want a divorce. Last week, before I was here my uncle drove me from our city to the suburbs & sang  Project Chick  in the car. When we parked he asked me to take off my shoes & there we walked, silent, barefoot circling the lake, trying to not step in goose shit. He walked in front & I trailed behind both our hands clasped behind our backs.    When you were my daughter,    When you were my daughter,     those were the happiest days of my life.     I wish you would come home. My love for the past is like my love for most things. I only feel it when I m gone. Best to stay gone so I m always in love. If I look at something too long it forgets its joy. All the floorboards carry death. My gold nails are fake & chipped. My bare feet skirt the shit.

All power is saved, having no end.     Rises in the green season, in the sudden season the white the budded                                              and the lost. Water celebrates, yielding continually sheeted and fast in its overfall slips down the rock, evades the pillars building its colonnades, repairs in stream and standing wave retains its seaward green broken by obstacle rock; falling, the water sheet spouts, and the mind dances, excess of white. White brilliant function of the land s disease.   Many-spanned, lighted, the crest leans under concrete arches and the channeled hills, turns in the gorge toward its release; kinetic and controlled, the sluice urging the hollow, the thunder, the major climax                                    energy total and open watercourse praising the spillway, fiery glaze, crackle of light, cleanest velocity flooding, the moulded force.                       I open out a way over the waterI open out a way over the water                     I form a path between the Combatants:I form a path between the Combatants:                    Grant that I sail down like a living bird,                    Grant that I sail down like a living bird,                    power over the fields and Pool of Fire.                    power over the fields and Pool of Fire.                    Phoenix, I sail over the phoenix world.                    Phoenix, I sail over the phoenix world.   Diverted water, the fern and fuming white ascend in mist of continuous diffusion. Rivers are turning inside their mountains, streams line the stone, rest at the overflow lake and in lanes of pliant color lie. Blessing of this innumerable silver, printed in silver, images of stone walk on a screen of falling water in film-silver in continual change recurring colored, plunging with the wave.   Constellations of light, abundance of many rivers. The sheeted island-cities, the white surf filling west, the hope, fast water spilled where still pools fed. Great power flying deep: between the rock and the sunset, the caretaker s house and the steep abutment, hypnotic water fallen and the tunnels under the moist and fragile galleries of stone, mile-long, under the wave. Whether snow fall, the quick light fall, years of white cities fall, flood that this valley built falls slipping down the green turn in the river s green. Steep gorge, the wedge of crystal in the sky.        How many feet of whirlpools?      What is a year in terms of falling water?      Cylinders; kilowatts; capacities.      Continuity:   Q = 0      Equations for falling water. The streaming motion.      The balance-sheet of energy that flows      passing along its infinite barrier.        It breaks the hills, cracking the riches wide,      runs through electric wires;      it comes, warning the night,      running among these rigid hills,      a single force to waken our eyes.        They poured the concrete and the columns stood,      laid bare the bedrock, set the cells of steel,      a dam for monument was what they hammered home.      Blasted, and stocks went up;      insured the base,      and limousines      wrote their own graphs upon      roadbed and lifeline.   Their hands touched mastery: wait for defense, solid across the world. Mr. Griswold.  A corporation is a body without a soul.  Mr. Dunn. When they were caught at it they resorted to the      methods employed by gunmen, ordinary machine gun racke-      teers. They cowardly tried to buy out the people who had the      information on them. Mr. Marcantonio. I agree that a racket has been practised, but the      most damnable racketeering that I have ever known is the      paying of a fee to the very attorney who represented these      victims. That is the most outrageous racket that has ever come      within my knowledge. Miss Allen. Mr. Jesse J. Ricks, the president of the Union Carbide      & Carbon Corporation, suggested that the stockholder had      better take this question up in a private conference. The dam is safe. A scene of power. The dam is the father of the tunnel. This is the valley s work, the white, the shining.                                                                                                                                                                                           Stock and                                           Dividend in                                                                 Net             Closing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Stock and                                     High  Low            Dollars                   Open   High   Low    Last   Chge.   Bid    Ask    Sales  High  Low            Dollars                   Open   High   Low    Last   Chge. Bid    Ask    Sales       111   61    Union Carbide (3.20)...67     69    67    69     +3     69    69   3 ,400                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 The dam is used when the tunnel is used. The men and the water are never idle, have definitions. This is a perfect fluid, having no age nor hours, surviving scarless, unaltered, loving rest, willing to run forever to find its peace in equal seas in currents of still glass. Effects of friction : to fight and pass again, learning its power, conquering boundaries, able to rise blind in revolts of tide, broken and sacrificed to flow resumed. Collecting eternally power. Spender of power, torn, never can be killed, speeded in filaments, million, its power can rest and rise forever, wait and be flexible. Be born again. Nothing is lost, even among the wars, imperfect flow, confusion of force. It will rise. These are the phases of its face. It knows its seasons, the waiting, the sudden. It changes. It does not die.  

Behind the silo, the Mother Rabbit hunches like a giant spider with strange calm: six tiny babies beneath, each clamoring for a sweet syringe of milk. This may sound cute to you, reading from your pulpit of plenty, but one small one was left out of reach, a knife of fur barging between the others. I watched behind a turret of sand. If I could have cautioned the mother rabbit I would. If I could summon the Bunnies to fit him in beneath the belly's swell I would. But instead, I stood frozen, wishing for some equity. This must be why it's called Wild Life because of all theWild Life crazed emotions tangled up in the underbrush within us. Did I tell you how the smallest one, black and trembling, hopped behind the kudzu still filigreed with wanting? Should we talk now of animal heritage, their species, creature development? And what do we say about form and focus  writing this when a stray goes hungry, and away.

Is anything central? Orchards flung out on the land, Urban forests, rustic plantations, knee-high hills? Are place names central? Elm Grove, Adcock Corner, Story Book Farm? As they concur with a rush at eye level Beating themselves into eyes which have had enough Thank you, no more thank you. And they come on like scenery mingled with darkness The damp plains, overgrown suburbs, Places of known civic pride, of civil obscurity.   These are connected to my version of America But the juice is elsewhere. This morning as I walked out of your room After breakfast crosshatched with Backward and forward glances, backward into light, Forward into unfamiliar light, Was it our doing, and was it The material, the lumber of life, or of lives We were measuring, counting? A mood soon to be forgotten In crossed girders of light, cool downtown shadow In this morning that has seized us again?   I know that I braid too much on my own Snapped-off perceptions of things as they come to me. They are private and always will be. Where then are the private turns of event Destined to bloom later like golden chimes Released over a city from a highest tower? The quirky things that happen to me, and I tell you, And you know instantly what I mean? What remote orchard reached by winding roads Hides them? Where are these roots?   It is the lumps and trials That tell us whether we shall be known And whether our fate can be exemplary, like a star. All the rest is waiting For a letter that never arrives, Day after day, the exasperation Until finally you have ripped it open not knowing what it is, The two envelope halves lying on a plate. The message was wise, and seemingly Dictated a long time ago, but its time has still Not arrived, telling of danger, and the mostly limited Steps that can be taken against danger Now and in the future, in cool yards, In quiet small houses in the country, Our country, in fenced areas, in cool shady streets.

I am Queen and I shall do my utmost to fulfil my duty towards my country.Duty is a slapped mouth, sewn shut with cat-gut.Duty is a slapped mouth, sewn shut with cat-gut. To my dear, loyal subjects who are assembled to show their good humour and excessive loyalty.Apes, hyenas, jackdaws: how they screech and caw.Apes, hyenas, jackdaws: how they screech and caw. How proud I felt to be the Queen of such a Nation, the Crown being placed on my head, so gently.But such a weight! Monstrous as a beached whale.But such a weight! Monstrous as a beached whale. It was, I remember, a most beautiful, impressive moment. My robes draped on the chair beautifully.White body full of blood, bruises that bleed.White body full of blood, bruises that bleed. Nothing was done without his loving advice and help, darling Albert was the other part of me.FIlled with life after life after life after life after life.FIlled with life after life after life after life after life.life after life after life after life after life. The only ray of comfort I get for a moment is in the firm conviction and certainty.I remember the chloroform. So blissfully empty of voices.I remember the chloroform. So blissfully empty of voices. of his nearness, his undying love and of our eternal reunion. Impatiently I wait and I do my damn duty.damn  

There s trouble on the mountain And the valley s full of smoke There s crying on the mountain And again the same heart broke.   The lights are on past midnite The curtains closed all day There s trouble on the mountain The valley people say.

If time is an arrow, what is its target If a Flexible Flyer is the sled I had as a child, when may I become a child again Do you need help digging the potatoes out of your garden of insults Do you plan to vote in the next election Is our country headed in the right direction or the wrong direction              and what did the bulldozer tell the yellow helmet s ear Which part of your body is like biting into a ripe peach              which part shames you like a rotten banana Would you like to find out how to lower your interest rate When you go to heaven how old will you choose to be              will you have cocktails on the well-watered lawn                          where Bach conducts Bach Will you still chase after the Grateful Dead Is your life like air leaking out of a balloon, or like rain falling on a pond             dot dot dot      dear pocks     pocking the surface     dot dot dot Can it be like snow falling on the ocean Can desire drown you like syrup over pancakes When an ambulance siren wakes you at 3 a.m. do you feel relieved             not to be strapped to that stretcher                          speeding toward the grim unknown                                        do you then snuggle next to someone Are you satisfied with your detergent Can you name a more perfect irony than the new world trade center, sacred icon of             capitalism, revered lingam of profit, soaring above the  memorial pools                                         of people killed when the first towers fell Can you describe the scent of dried blood What about the smell of iron chains in your cell              can you sing the threnody of the maggots When I removed my mask did I frighten you              like a drone crossing your sky Are you satisfied with your auto insurance When ecstasy approaches why do you resist              What are you afraid of                           Can you please unbutton your shirt now

                                      1                                       1 My ear amps whistle like they are singing to Echo, goddess of noise, the raveled knot of tongues, of blaring birds, consonant crumbs of dull doorbells, sounds swamped in my misty hearing aid tubes. Gaud  believed in holy sound and built a cathedral to contain it, pulling hearing men from their knees as though atheism is a kind of deafness. Who would turn down God? Even though I have not heard the golden decibels of angels, I have been living in a noiseless palace where the doorbell is pulsating light and I am able to answer.                                       2What?What? a word that keeps looking in mirrors like it is in love with its own volume.What?What? I am a one-word question, a one-man patience test.What?What? What language would we speak without ears?What?What? Is paradise a world where I hear everything?What?What? How will my brain know what to hold if it has too many arms?                                       3 The day I clear out my dead father s flat, I throw away boxes of molding LPs, Garvey, Malcolm X, Mandela, speeches on vinyl. I find a TDK cassette tape on the shelf, smudged green label Raymond Speaking.Raymond Speaking I play the tape in his vintage cassette player and hear my two-year-old voice chanting my name AntrobAntrob and dad s laughter crackling in the background not knowing I couldn t hear the word  bus  and wouldn t until I got my hearing aids. Now I sit here listening to the space of deafness   Antrob Antrob AntrobAntrob Antrob Antrob                                       4 And no one knew what I was missing until a doctor gave me a handful of Legos and said to put a brick on the table every time I heard a sound. After the test I still held enough bricks in my hand to build a house and call it my sanctuary, call it the reason I sat in saintly silence during my grandfather s sermons when he preached the good news, I only heard as Babylon s babbling echoes.                                       5           And if you don t catch nothingAnd if you don t catch nothing           then something wrong with your ears             they been tuned to de wrong frequency                                     Kei Miller                                     Kei Miller So maybe I belong to the universe underwater, where all songs are smeared wailings for Salacia, goddess of saltwater, healer of infected ears, which is what the doctor thought I had, since deafness did not run in the family but came from nowhere, so they syringed in olive oil and saltwater, and we all waited to see what would come out.

  

But the truth is, I am Thursday on a Monday. I Am the walking calendar alive of mixed-up days and dim hours. I have A week inside of me, a week or a year, time out of order. I have contracted With the world to behave, to try, hard, to be Monday on a Monday. I Look like I am happiness, don t you think? On Monday, to you I have The right laugh, and seem always to be even-keeled and at-eased.

Let the relentless fist be kissed. The salt cannot be cooked; the past is overlooked. Full once they nibble, fleas quibble. Teeth in a hyena s face always slide into place. No donkey can cart what weighs down your heart. Outside a man is respected; at home that man is neglected. The strangers weep and leave; family members grieve. Even half-blind men hope to see again. True words end; lies extend.    Translated from the OromoTranslated from the OromoTranslated from the OromoTranslated from the Oromo

Looking up,  The purple now,  she dips her brush and finishes the day. The flag descends. She draws the fire with a marker on fax paper uncurling from its spool. Inventory of glasses, the handblown ones blue-edged could hold a sunset neat, the new regime is softball-sized and etched with tigers. In town they re pulling draughts for every swinging door. Don t get angry, don t get angry. The soaker s washed and left to dry. Iron Hessians oversee the fire gone to bed beside the harbor, geese calling each to each triangulate the dark. Passing through or are they wintering over? In chevron resolve. Like waking to the rain and walking anyway. She thinking of what to do with pawpaw  jelly, he of mildew and of marrow, while their youngest bouncing gums the leather dice cup, sister rolls, counts, and makes a point. Get even says the horizon like the sun, democratic and unsparing.

The way the universe sat waiting to become, quietly, in the nether of space and time,   you too remain some cellular snuggle dangling between my legs, curled in the warm   swim of my mostly quietest self. If you come to be  And who knows? I wonder, little bubble   of unbudded capillaries, little one ever aswirl in my vascular galaxies, what would you think   of this world which turns itself steadily into an oblivion that hurts, and hurts bad?   Would you curse me my careless caressing you into this world or would you rise up   and, mustering all your strength into that tiny throat which one day, no doubt, would grow big and strong,   scream and scream and scream until you break the back of one injustice, or at least get to your knees to kiss back to life   some roadkill? I have so many questions for you, for you are closer to me than anyone   has ever been, tumbling, as you are, this second, through my heart s every chamber, your teeny mouth   singing along with the half-broke workhorse s steady boom and gasp. And since we re talking today I should tell you,   though I know you sneak a peek sometimes through your father s eyes, it s a glorious day,   and there are millions of leaves collecting against the curbs, and they re the most delicate shade of gold   we ve ever seen and must favor the transparent wings of the angels you re swimming with, little angel.   And as to your mother well, I don t know  but my guess is that lilac bursts from her throat   and she is both honeybee and wasp and some kind of moan to boot and probably she dances in the morning    but who knows? You ll swim beneath that bridge if it comes. For now let me tell you about the bush called honeysuckle   that the sad call a weed, and how you could push your little sun-licked face into the throngs and breathe and breathe.   Sweetness would be your name, and you would wonder why four of your teeth are so sharp, and the tiny mountain range   of your knuckles so hard. And you would throw back your head and open your mouth at the cows lowing their human songs   in the field, and the pigs swimming in shit and clover, and everything on this earth, little dreamer, little dreamer   of the new world, holy, every rain drop and sand grain and blade of grass worthy of gasp and joy and love, tiny shaman,   tiny blood thrust, tiny trillion cells trilling and trilling, little dreamer, little hard hat, little heartbeat, little best of me.

What hand opened the door, I don't know. No one lives there in winter. And I don't know if it was for entrance or for exit that the place opened itself, or was opened, though I do know what boundaries were broken. The lake lay frozen, the sky still as folded wings. And everywhere snow blown into the rooms, strewn across the braided rugs and knotty boards, under chairs, creeping like a slow cold tide, white and silent, out of its element with greed. Then I remembered the photograph, black and white, as old as me or older. What eye watched that scene, taking it in, shameless, I don't know, though I do know that boundaries were broken: A woman, her grey dress blowing toward land, lost on the shore in the dim light of her long day's end, and a man, farther up the beach, alone. The sea  mute, infinite entity taking in its borders hungrily; and the stolen child it drank up when each entered the other in a moment of dropped vigilance. In this kind of world no blueprint instructs us how to house what we love against the winds of loss. The woman, the man, their child gone slipped from the safe home of their love, swallowed whole. I am not going to try to feel what that woman felt, or to speak with her voice. I don't know what she did next or how she did what she did next. She is the mother, my fear, all the love ever lost to grief. Her pain is an ocean vaster than planets, a diaspora of longing flung to all four flogging winds. In her life, I am sure that time drifted past her, with her, within her. I know that that summer, like all summers, moved on through the fall into winter, that the shore closed up, abandoned, cold. And that the thing lost still blows through us, the swollen door no longer shuts.

which regenerate their tails and also eat only the tails of other electric eels, presumably smaller, who, in turn, eat ...  Without consulting an ichthyologist   eels are fish   I defer to biology s genius. I know little of their numbers and habitat, other than they are river dwellers. Guess which river. I have only a note, a note taken in reading or fever   I can t tell, from my handwriting, which. All I know is it seems sensible, sustainable: no fish dies, nobody ever gets so hungry he bites off more than a tail; the sting, the trauma keeps the bitten fish lean and alert. The need to hide while regrowing a tail teaches guile. They ll eat smaller tails for a while. These eels, these eels themselves are odes!

Who won? I said. The game s tomorrow, he said. And I became the snail I always was, crossing the field in my helmet. But I d given it my all, while the plane arced on its way to a landing, when I overheard the woman behind us sayI was gathering wildflowers to make a wreathI was gathering wildflowers to make a wreath to lay on my mother s grave when my son fell off a mountain in Italy and I felt such joy over the unknown outcome of her words I was not ashamed, for I can feign interest in the world, just as she in that great green meadow must have.

We trekked into a far country, My friend and I. Our deeper content was never spoken, But each knew all the other said. He told me how calm his soul was laid By the lack of anvil and strife.  The wooing kestrel,  I said,  mutes his mating-note To please the harmony of this sweet silence.  And when at the day s end We laid tired bodies  gainst The loose warm sands, And the air fleeced its particles for a coverlet; When star after star came out To guard their lovers in oblivion  My soul so leapt that my evening prayer Stole my morning song!

56.

Without the manifest necessity of a paint-laden brush, the motion traced by the painter's hand would mimic that moth's fragile desperation against the glass as it seeks escape into the already painted sunset.                             It drops to the sill periodically the way the painter's hand would drop to the palette.                                                            Then it sputters back up erratically and zigzags to indicate the horizontal nature of sunsets.                                                                                                       On the other side of the glass, free to the air, a nighthawk enacts the same erratic striving, up and up and down and sideways then up again and falteringly up until it drops, wings folded, suicidally earthward.                     It spreads its wings just above the ground for the life- saving aerialist's breathtaking swoop.                                                                      Air through feathers (they call it drumming) hums like a wind harp or tissue paper on a comb.   The nighthawk flies like that, erratic as a bat, because that's how moths fly, and that's what nighthawks eat and what they feed their fledglings.                    Nighthawks build no nests but lay their eggs on bare ground.                Their camouflage is so perfect you can find them only by accident.                 If you are out walking and the mother flies up, pulling that clich d broken-wing trick, and you mark the spot she rose from, you can find the eggs..                                                   If you go back after they hatch, you can look right at them and think they aren't there just some small chunks of wood.                 So I'm watching this nighthawk and the moth on the glass in their painterly struggles that mirror each other as the sunset reclines, aloof.                                         This is the only moth I've seen this rainless summer.                  The only nighthawk too.                                                               So I open the window and give them both what they want.

How solitary and resolute you look in the morning. A stoic in your cotton sleeve. Do you dream of walking out rain or shine a truffle balanced on your sternum and passing me on the sidewalk? Or is that a smile because you interpret nothing and statelessness is where you live? How calmly you indulge my moods. See you tonight, by the sovereign chartreuse ceramics at the Met. Let's hear what you'd do differently.

Beauty exists, la ermozura egziste and paradisesla ermozura egziste are not artificial, yet how can one have fans of ginkgo, green right next to yellow, and human faces in the sunshine, pearls of architecture and thoughts about the dust that we become? Two days later I remember only theory, what we said concerning the mathematics of the Alhambra and the fragments of poems, so I undress quickly, to catch life red-handed, to relish the goodness of your home amid the hills encircled by a wedding party where I seek and find, seek and do not find, seek and disappear and       Translated from the PolishTranslated from the PolishTranslated from the PolishTranslated from the Polish

That woman s husband works the graveyard shift in a warehouse someplace. He s a big man, and sleeps all day. I bet he drinks. But what do I know? Dark clouds are stealing in. Well, no they aren't. That's poetry, and bad at that. She s a headstone color: gray hair, gray face.   Her hooded sweatshirt s dull, like a sheet of old tin. It s as though she doesn t look forward to much but passing away. Her eyes are gray too, though it's too easy to call them empty. Their tears might so easily flow. Oh no. I m fussing around for eloquence here and coming up empty. The woman and I just nod at each other   as we wait by the post office window. Though I m a rather old man now, I go on looking toward some sort of future. I m a big man too, which may be why that woman shrinks. Or I think she does. We all like the postmistress, who s old herself but spry,   and despite her losses still cheerful and bright. Her hairdo s new. I recall her husband, who was a person people here always called Big Mike. Some old folks claim the man could lift a barrel brimful of hard cider right over his head. I d like to imagine some tribute to Mike. I d write it, if that were feasible.   A character, Mike. He drove a truck that he d brush-painted pink. He lived with his wife and children and a bunch of critters and mixed-breed hunting dogs far back in the woods. In time the kids grew up and moved from here, but the family, we remember,   seemed always so decent and gentle with one another. The postmistress wears that shirt she loves. It s a pretty shirt. Now what shall I name it? Purple? Fuschia? Puce? And how might I sort them, good and evil? How portray them? Let the clouds above, the God-damned clouds, steal in. No, let them hurtle.  

Rub the entire block of SPAM*, along with the accompanying gelatinous goo, onto your wood furniture. The oils from the SPAM* moisturize the wood and give it a nice luster. Plus, you'll have enough left over to use as your own personal lubricant (a true Pacific dinner date). Why didn't you tell me about the "In Honor of Guam's Liberation" SPAM*! I'm trying to collect them all! Once I was on a diet and SPAM* faded from my consciousness. Then I met my future wife, who's Hawaiian, and SPAM* became part of my life again (a true Pacific romance). Maybe the economic downturn will help people appreciate SPAM* instead of loathing it. SPAM* doesn't have to be unhealthy; I eat SPAM* every day and I'm not dead, yet just switch to SPAM* Lite. Despite rumors, SPAM* is NOT made of such odds and ends as hooves, ears, brains, native peoples, or whole baby pigs. The name itself stands for Specially Processed Army Meal, Salted Pork And More, Super Pink Artificial Meat, Snake Possum And Mongoose, or Some People Are Missing. My uncle is the reigning Guam SPAM* king. He won the last SPAM* cook off with his Spicy SPAM* meatballs. I will never forget the two-pound SPAM* bust of George Washington he made for Liberation Day, toasted crispy on the outside with raw egg yolk in the hollow center  the kids loved it! Only a fool would start a company in Guam that provides SPAM* protection. For Xmas, I bought a snow globe featuring a can of SPAM* sitting on an island. Turn it over and a typhoon swirls madly, unable to unseat SPAM* from its place of honor. I have a souvenir can I bought after seeing Monty Python's SPAM*ALOT on Broadway in New York City. It cost me $10 and is the most expensive SPAM*
I've ever bought. I will never eat it.
 

You are afraid of the dark, for which you blame the raccoons, or more to the point, your father, who took you and your mother into the night with a flashlight and shotgun, then left with both, while you held her shaking hand. You would follow your father to the end of the world, those distant birch woods where raccoons rustle and flash their green eyes. His gun was firing into the persimmon trees and the rain of leaves and ripe fruit fell farther and farther, until only the crackle of his shots and the distant baying of the hounds could be heard. The raccoons came then to hiss all around: he left you, he left you, and now you are ours.

I had not vomited in so long Someone put the hex on my true-to-selfness Some sorcerer kept me far from my guts The guts I feared would choke me And make me ashamed of having no wings And drown my own heart I know how to survive a feeling But I forgot that I knew it A manic forgetter froze my meats I kept asking for help when I didn't need it My demons stared out from the ice When they finally thawed they'd been dead all along And now I am the walking thawed You survive yourself if you wait long enough And vomit your guts down your defrosted breast And bathe in your mess and say baby it's fine

The chickens are back in their coop. The kids are out on the town. It's here in one fell swoop.                 It's sundown. You've heard them say it before. The rumour's been going around. You're heading straight for the door.                 It's sundown.                 You've forgotten what you said.                 All that matters is here and now                 No one's getting you to bed,                 even though it's sundown. The trucks roll by on the highway. You want to follow that sound. You want to have your say                at sundown. The dusk turns into dark. You walk away with a frown. You're the only one in the park                past sundown.                Here's where the children played,                but they're not here right now.                You don't want to end your day,                even though it's sundown.  

I begin to think Actaeon never changed. The words that followed him, the poems That leapt upon him and left him for dead Were difficult exactly to the extent They were rational. It makes perfect sense For nakedness to give way to frenzy. And the poems, let s be clear, were naked. Time was, questions were put, clear as water. The Goddess bathed, and time was the soft smile Of water catching the sunlight on her. And the sunlight, let s be clear, was sheer murder. Into the same creature, no human word Leaps twice. Given to frenzy, nakedness Smiles upon the breaking of men and dogs. How easy to lose all patience with chaste things! Christ, I am hoping to hear from you Before the hunters and suicides make off with me. Christ, I am hoping to take your weapons To a tarn freezing in the death of me. I shall harry the moon there. I shall halloo. Bayed in the cross-tree is a lion too. In 1969 a red stag made A cobweb of moonlight in his antlers. For once in your life, pray without ceasing, Pray the stag safely by the lion s tree. Actaeon never changed. Predator Is simply prey to nakedness and reason. The poems have been out hunting all the time. Then it is Friday. Frisk. You might as well. Seeing as the rapeweed, you might as well. The lion is no stranger. The belling Stag is as familiar as the moon, but a strange Suicide. Taken by legs, taken By sinews, kissing the cobwebs of moonlight, He prays the prayer I was not quick to say. Berries and hoardings, ermine horseplay short Of the new, short of poems no longer old As I knew them, leaving the small schools For the main campus rapeweed climbing, pale. It is Friday. Stars won t cross. Actaeon Never imagined the frail, sheer speed Of meat. Christ, eat me. Nothing else makes sense. On the far Safe side of becoming, Metaphor Is all love, The pure being of each Nude above Perfect sense. I begin to hunt words. The tension The soft smile Of the Goddess eases A short while Reappears In a red stag s terror. Metaphor Leaps and eats. It is not difficult. Love is meat. The dogs leap on Actaeon. He is human. I begin to think of Time as anything In the gift of humans or as sacrifice To the long uplift of lions in the blood. Now dogs tear deeply into the living flesh. Each moment is a visible agony, And still the godly human nature remains Unharmed. I never imagined the sheer frail Of fear so powerful. Legs and sinews turn Into flowers. Between her breasts, the Goddess Shelters one such, one blood violet alive. The porch of heaven is littered with color. As familiar as the moon, our humanness Crosses into heaven as the new poem. On the far side of becoming, a life s work Begins another kind of work, but naked Of change. There are animals, water and trees. Nothing is recognizable in its old Skin, yet everything shimmers. I am afraid, Shrinking from the teeth of the cold water And from the howling trees. I perish at this point Down among dogs and upwards beside lion. The pieces of me are carried fast away By plot and rhyme. See Artemis bathing. The moonlight on her body is the mother Of God. It makes perfect sense. I am eaten And fed changeless into her breast, blood Violet alive. I remain your friend.

What was it he felt humming beneath his skin? Gaze   of a twelve-year-old feasting. The hair on those arms.  

I said no to you so often, couldn't see. Do you know how that changed you  divided what you saw in me or anything (if you did) from what you said or mostly didn't? And another bottle drained, your head lolling off the chair's back, the mirror's face blacked.

you have to understand it was so hot   sand as far as the eye could see sand in teeth   a sealess life every step a sinking a scratch   every storm more sand   no sweat when we danced pure salt in our lovemaking   i tried to spit once it came out like a whistle   my first period curry powder   old wives spoke of tears   we thought they were senile   laughter was our wettest thing   we prayed often to no one   we believed in music   dry palms clapping dust on ankle bracelets   we threw tabla and daff caught spirit and sagat   a blaring life the wailing or caesarean births   widows' eyes wept wind   even our tongues were tanned   something sun-dried in every recipe   rays were babies' first words   you have to understand we forgot how to be thirsty   mud by then was primitive splashing the stuff of legend   only giddiness quenched us   we were dizzy all the time in the world all the time   then we heard him grumbling to himself   something about forty something about a flood   clad in sheep's wool he reeked of wolf shit   something about monogamy something about shelter   i thought: this must be heatstroke   i thought: the brain of a six-hundred-year-old   i thought: he is a conceptual artist   the ark an installation   his masterpiece took years   took trees got bigger   he was our favorite dirty joke   beloved schizophrenic neighbor   then he started preaching then he kidnapped pigs   mosquitos doves   things that wanted to eat each other stuffed onto the same boat   we threw our heads back we slapped ashy knees   we mooned him threw hot stones   we streaked whistled in his face   kicked the baking ship   laughter was our thunder thing   the lucky ones died laughing   for centuries he warned us   condescending motherfucker foaming at the mouth   sweat dripping from his beard   condensation how did we miss it?   i have no words for the first drop cooling the cheek   grandfathers raised their arms lightning made the children leap   sizzle gave way to drizzle humidity taught humility   we opened our mouths swallowing everything   the clouds begat clouds began to bite us back   panic soaked our slouching spines   the instruments drowned first   we played them sopping out of tune   denial gave way to rivers   i fell into a puddle my very first shiver   the shock of cold water made me orgasm   so all the times before had been dry heave?   so this was mourning this was mikveh?   the sky from blue to za'atar hail   we choked god's vomit filled our lungs   apologies bellyflopped reaching went out of reach   we ran from high desert to highest mountain   to whirlpool or choral grief   if noah had keen merciful he would have taught us how to swim   instead he saved two mice   muttered prayers shut the door   the best belly dancers became mermaids   the dinosaurs learned to fly   we never saw a rainbow   our grave stones coral reef

I remember watching my father stop halfway up the driveway because my tricycle was blocking the way to the garage, and how he solved the problem by picking up the tricycle by the handlebars and smashing it through the windshield of our brand new family station wagon, his face red with scotch, his black tie and jacket flapping with effort, the tricycle making its way a little farther with each blow into the roomy interior of the latest model as the safety glass relented, the tricycle and the windshield both praiseworthy in their toughness, the struggle between them somehow making perfect sense in midday on our quiet suburban street, the windshield the anvil, the trike the hammer, the marriage the forge, and failure glowing in the heat, beaten and tempered, slowly taking shape.

O mer! O m urs! O merde contemporaine!   What s left of my battles and my turmoil is in my seaside cabin: this roiling air. And yet it s what s outside that makes me shiver. Not the ocean coldness   something heavier. Hot black tea might help   it revives. Two kinds of glass are at hand for my thirst: that windowpane, this tumbler for my tea. If  I stare through the faceted clear sides of   the second at the first, I ll see the darkness squinting back at me. I can t deny that even though my eye    clairvoyant as a crystal ball   clinks like it can see something, I don t know what comes next    ...     (Zek   zek   whetstones on knives    ...     a nickering    ...    Here comes a horse, it whinnies and the rider   Stick him!, thieves shout as they leap down from a tree and stab, then they lead the horse away down the long snowbound shore.) Windswept snow and sand are sorrel: tea leaves scalded by sunset. Sea foam rushes up these shores to decorate some fir trees but not others. And on the withers of a wave a gull-equestrian comes riding in    Haie! Here they both are! Snow explodes like sugar that someone is stabbing with a spoon in a glass of chai. And the tea-air sweetens, the snow-sand dissolves, the light of  it switched off, spent, an omen: now look   from deep within the firmament Time has bobbed up like the moon: the clock face of  a slice of   lemon. I clink the teaspoon in the glass   what s that about? And even though each hourly radius of   the lemon slice is fixed in the white rind, between these translucencies pressed pulp spills out. Like lime or lemon, the taste of  Time is sour    and yet it has no odor, color, hour. My clinking teaspoon s yet another of my self-delusions, since it s only the glass that answers it, and Time says nothing in reply   like all the other governings that invite us to believe they have their power over us. In every object, quick or dead, there s Time, yet Time itself  is unaware of   Time    the way a gull (such a polyglot of  fish-tongues), soaring in the dark, unknowingly glows at ten to two, her wings the phosphorescent hands of a clock. No people in this region. But   do people exist at all? And the so-called base and superstructure get, at best, a grade of  C (in Russian,  three,  troika   a kind of carriage   in which the Uriah Heeps are riding toward our  bright new future     ...    ). Oh, plenty of   hearty pink-faced people (gray-faced, too) here    ...    but are they that real? There s only sea and tides and more of the same. Sea air throws bombast at my cabin and makes it talk. My window s blinded by a heavy foamy sea-pulp blast. At the bottom of my tea glass   sweetest sweet. But sugar specks are stuck to the sides, scarcely rinsed by waves of tea, whether attacked or not by my spoon. Now come the many stars that the sky is, or was    like the American flag on the moon    but under such a sky, who feels he needs Kant s categorical imperative? So Time is always empty, a negative, and doesn t bother us the way this landscape does. I could have sparkled like a Cicero! But even out here all words are turned into a game of  ping-pong, which makes my silenced brain come bubbling out my throat   it s just one more white foam    ...     And only an insatiable gull s scream of dissent marks this deaf   land not as the island of a castaway but as a massive continent.Translated from the Russian by Reginald Gibbons and the authorTranslated from the Russian by Reginald Gibbons and the author  

It was twilight all day. Sometimes the smallest things weigh us down, small stones that we can't help admiring and palming. Look at the tiny way this lighter vein got inside. Look at the heavy gray dome of its sky. This is no immutable world. We know less than its atoms, rushing through. Light, light. Light as air, to them, for all we know. Trust me on this one, there is happiness at stake. Boulder, grain. Planet, dust: What fills the stones fills us. I remember, or I have a feeling, I could be living somewhere with you, weighted down the way we aren't now. Often the greatest things, those you'd think would be the heaviest, are the very ones that float.

My eye climbs a row of spoilers soldered into ailerons, cracked bay doors haphazarded into windows where every rivet bleeds contrails of rust. An hour ago, the doctor s wand waved across my chest and I watched blood on a small screen get back-sucked into my weakened heart. It s grown a hole I have to monitor: one torn flap shuddering an infinite ellipsis of gray stars back and forth. You re the writer, the doctor saidYou re the writer,  in French. Tell me what you see. Easier to standTell me what you see.  in a courtyard full of tourists scrying shapes from this titanic Rorschach. Here s a pump stub shaped like a hand; something celled, cavernously fluted as a lobster s abdomen. How much work it must have taken to drag these bits out of pits of flame, from lake beds and rice paddies, and stack them in layers: the French planes heaped beneath the American ones, while the Englishwoman beside me peers into this mess of metals, trying to isolate one image from the rest. Ski boot buckle or tire pump, she muses at me, fossilized shark s jaw, clothespin, wasp s nest? According to the camera, it s just a picture changing with each angle, relic turned to rib cage, chrome flesh to animal: all the mortal details enumerated, neutered. I watch her trace an aluminum sheet torched across a thruster as if wind had tossed a silk scarf over a face. If she pulled it back, would I find a body foreign as my own entombed in here, a thousand dog tags jangling in the dark? I tilt my head: the vision slides once more past me, each plane reassembling then breaking apart. Spikes of grief  or is it fury? throb across the surface. Everything has a rip in it, a hole, a tear, the dim sounds of something struggling to pry open death s cracked fuselage. White sparks, iron trails. My heart rustles in its manila folder. How the doctor smiled at the images I fed him: A row of trees, I said,A row of trees,  pointing at my chart. Stone towers,Stone towers,a flock of backlit swallows a flock of backlit swallows                                                           Now I kneel beside a cross of blades on which the Englishwoman tries to focus. Do you think I ll get itDo you think I ll get itall in the shot? she calls as she steps back.all in the shot?  Steps back and back. Something like a knife sheath. Something like a saint s skull. The sky floats past, horizon sucked into it. She won t.

He can t stop putting the dead flowers, the deadhead nails, the deadweight sacks of flour in his mouth. He can t stop writing about the mouth. The way he woke up to his mouth full of bees, their dead crunch still stinging his gums. He writes: There s somethingThere s something beautiful in the way a mouth can be broken by saliva and cold air. She broke his mouth open and filled it with lead- tainted earth. She made him brain-dead through the mouth; licked the honey she pulled from his incisors like sap from a tree. His mouth, with its stretch marks running along his cheeks   she s never seen anything like it. His mouth a scar of his hunger, a scar of his gluttony after the hunger. Stop writing about the mouth: the teeth, the gums, the impacted tooth and its psychedelic blues and greens. Stop writing how she bit your mouth and with a blowtorch welded its dark-open shut. Stop writing about the mouth: the tongue, the holy molars, the wear of grinding yourself to bone. Stop writing about the mouth: his mouth, your mouth, her mouth.

My wife went into the pantry for peaches but came out with a baby   I hadn t noticed the house was pregnant, she said    it was crying, so I cried back    then she cried, the woman I barely know after sixteen years   why just the other day, she told me she d always been afraid #2 pencils might be made of what they re named   but even crying it was cute   pink and scrunchy-eyed    like a newt balloon someone had blown up until puffy and ready to pop    it was as if the universe decided it was time to act our age   that s when we threw all our heroin out    took the high-wire down and stopped skeet shooting in the living room    and as much as I miss yelling PullPull while stoned and standing on the edge of the air, looking into the abyssal fall I sorta desperately want, someone s gotta change the diapers and burp the thing when it fills with swamp-gas or whatever that is   the miracle, you know, of birth is that my wife and I gave up hang gliding for making the nummy sound against the belly of the beast who showed up and took over    just as once, I shot the rapids, popped out, squirmed against my mother and destroyed every other future she might have lived but one   long before I could speak, I was cruel   for a few seconds, I let my mother believe I was everything she ever wanted   and even now, decades after my few perfect seconds as a baby, if I called, at the first unexpected brush of Hey, maHey, ma against her ear, she d still be hoodwinked by the tidal pull of my voice on the ghost of a womb they long ago ripped out, that she was holding a full moon in her arms

The sky is bright with stars After a hot day The coolness of my body Leaving finger by toe in the heat of the spa Looking through the garden lights At tall houses around me I thought, No, just happy The night is bright with stars, She told me She no longer missed her parents But you loved them, I said I did, said she, more than myself And now I m free That was my friend Pipi Such a whore, I said to myself Like me, such a whore like me As I hear the roosters of Samoa In the laughing of coyotes

The parrot, Einstein of birds, who can count and reason calmly in our tongue while outliving us, disdains the ostrich. For all its sprint records, the ostrich will be remembered for hiding from the truth. You can t outrun stupid. We the people hold some truths to be self-evident: our magnificent brain in a body that can t flee, can t smell fear, can t hear death, can t see straight. Even so, our retinas, with rods and cones as intricate as any telescope array, evolved to see a predator slide out of oblique shadow and give us time to bolt. We survey our closed dominion until we look up in August to find comet dust flaring in the night. This vastness, this vertiginous awareness mocking gravity on our speck of now, wakes us with a recalibrating jolt. But soon our familiar star will claw toward us in seven-league boots from the east, drawing its Valium thread across our planet as if to cloak a birdcage to muffle questions that blink through dark matter and would pour over us until we drowned, dreaming of amnesia.

When I do count the clock that tells the time,  And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;  When I behold the violet past prime,  And sable curls all silver d o er with white; When lofty trees I see barren of leaves  Which erst from heat did canopy the herd, And summer s green all girded up in sheaves  Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard,  Then of thy beauty do I question make,  That thou among the wastes of time must go, Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake And die as fast as they see others grow;     And nothing  gainst Time s scythe can make defence    Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence. 

A fascicle of feathers in my hand, hand frantic and shaking, my arm holding my hand as far away from my body as possible I am disgusted. I cannot pull out the central stalks of my wings where they protrude from between my shoulder blades,   but I can strip every tuft of feathers from them to bare those cartilaginous stems as they rise from my back, stalks stripped perfectly clean so as to better tuck them along my spine, hide them, make them invisible beneath my clothing.   I was so foolish then, a teenager not yet able to accept what he was. When my wings blackened, withered, and fell off, I was beyond happy. They would stay dormant sometimes as long as three months. Sadly, they always came back.   In the bathroom mirror, I can see myself offering a cluster of feathers to myself, as if to say:Take this from me and I will be forever grateful.Take this from me and I will be forever grateful. But the me that is a trick of light on glass is uncaring, offers them back immediately.   If I concentrate, if I think hard on it, I can move my wings, and I practice in the bathroom mirror. But these wings cannot support my weight, cannot buoy me on even a strong gust of wind. What good are wings if you cannot fly?   What good is this ridiculous secret I am asked to keep? With the feathers ripped cleanly away, I tuck the stems along my spine. I bandage them down  cloth wound under my armpits, tightly wound around my chest. I fashion myself into an ordinary boy.  

He was led to be hanged. How to write this scene? Was it winter? Summer? From behind the fence across the street his mother watched. What should I call her? Let s say, Antanina. And he is Maxim. Why Maxim, and not Basil or Yanak? The stones tucked themselves under his feet, two magpies stalked him, poplar to poplar. You ve ever been hanged? Me, never yet. And that s the problem. So are the magpies. Why should there be two, not one? The gutters silver with spring waters. So was it spring? Alright. By the courthouse, gray soldiers, lined up in a row. In the park   ladies. And ladies  men. And where s mother?  It s best without her,  he thought. Do change her name. How s then? A truck with sides already dropped    above it   a noose. Above a noose    a cloud. Who s sitting at the wheel? His brother? Son? No, a son is pushing it. A brother then. And from behind the curtain in a palace next to the courthouse she watches. Marysya? Alright, Marysya. Those magpies. Soldiers. Water. Park. That cloud again. And glances from the crowd.  It s him ...  ...  Not you ... Not me ... For that, thank God ...   ...  ...  Bells ringing. Will he hear the bells? Behind Marysya stands the one who shares her bed. With blazing epaulets. And profile. And a hand around her waist. A river embraces the park. A river jammed with ice. Life blazes, rings. To sum it up, considering all mentioned:  He was led to be hanged.  Alone.    Translated from the BelarusianTranslated from the BelarusianTranslated from the BelarusianTranslated from the Belarusian



Invisible fish swim this ghost ocean now described by waves of sand, by water-worn rock. Soon the fish will learn to walk. Then humans will come ashore and paint dreams on the dying stone. Then later, much later, the ocean floor will be punctuated by Chevy trucks, carrying the dreamers  decendants, who are going to the store.

Going down the escalator of the subway, I glanced across and saw on the escalator's partner rising up someone who looked a bit like you but with hair not so soft and clean and warm as yours brushing against mine on those rare occasions when inadvertently our foreheads neared, making me wish it to stay. We were not physical lovers and never could have been. But we were close. Moved three states away, married happily or not, you are now only a person I may hope to meet momentarily, and not really then: merely in my mind, because of what I chance to see. But I am not unhappy about this or think that I am not. Because of your hair. Because of your beautiful hair.

They perched on roofs and fences and sills. They posed statue-still on catenary lines. They aligned along cables like prayer beads on rope. They amassed en masse on the cemetery lawn and marauded the broad, yawning fields like cattle. Their cackles were black. Each shadow dove and pecked. They nested in chimneys and chirped at the chime of the church bell. They worked in shifts. Clocked out at odd hours. They laid their eggs in the Vs of trees. They teemed on the dry-baked banks of creek beds, streams the sun had overseen. They teetered on the bed-knob tops of flagpoles. They pitched like pennies into founts. They pitched like babies into wells. They thumped at doors then skulked away like hoodlum teens. They jabbed her. When she cried they did it faster. Everyone knows what happened next. Some grew big as sunflower stalks, others tall like bonfire flames. Or moving vans. Or the sick, brick houses people die inside of every night. Their hatchlings canopied the sky. Was it her fault, then, when they pinned her to the ground and thrust their feathers down her throat? Or wormed between her legs in bad-man ways? Or rattled plumes and whooped and beat her body with their wings? Or locked their talons to her thighs and tra-la-la-ed that ditty from the old-time music box? Or forced their whiskies past her lips? Or put her in the pillory? This was foreplay, in a way. They rolled in rabid packs and woofed like dogs. She couldn t throw a bone. The meat was gone. They chased her and they named her and they boiled her tears and bathed her. Then they ate her.Vtra-la-la

maybe there is something about the seventh of June: Gwen,
Prince and me . . . or maybe people just have to be born at some
time . . . and there are only three hundred sixty-five days or three
sixty-six every four years or so . . . meaning that some things
happen at the same time in the same rising sign . . . and the same
houses in Gemini . . . but some of us might also consider the
possibility of reincarnating revolving restructuring that spirit . . .
reshaping that spirit . . . releasing that spirit . . . tucking the use-
less inside and when the useless pushes out again we restructure
again and poetry and song and praisesong go on  . . . because it is
the right thing to do
 
we always will cry when a great heart . . . a good soul . . . one of
the premier poets of her age restructures . . . reincarnates  . . .
revolves into a resolve that we now carry in our hearts . . . as all
great women and men are alive . . . not by biology but remem-
brance . . . and that s all right . . . as the old folk say . . . because as
long as they stay on the lips . . . they nestle in our hearts and those
souls which are planted . . . continue growing . . . until generations
not knowing their touch . . . their voice . . . or even the fact
that some Chicago poets are terrible cooks . . . but always fun
to eat with . . . will tell tales of having met someone who knew
someone who once watched a basketball game . . . in which some
Chicago poet cheered for Seattle at the request of some Virginia
poet who wanted more games . . . while Mr. Blakely was amazed
that a Chicago poet was even watching a game . . . and didn t
we miss him as he slipped away watching baseball . . . and what
a way to go . . . though we then did sort of know . . . that once
gone . . . he would call the woman he loved
 
and so we come to no more phone calls at six a.m. to chat ...
and no more Benihana when we are all in New York . . . and no
more gossiping and questioning and trying to make sense of a
senseless world . . . no more face-to-face . . . only the poetry which
is a great monument from this Topeka daughter to the world . . .
and yet . . . there can be no complaints in this passing . . . no
sorrow songs . . . no if onlys . . . it is all here: the work the love:
the woman: who gave and gave and gave . . . no complaints of too
long or too hard . . . no injustice of accident or misunderstanding
of disease . . . just one great woman moving to the next phase . . .
and us on the ground . . . giving Alleluias

I can t leave my hurting skull Or the rose apple opening inside me. I ll count the weeks, months, Unfurling each numbered day in my hair. Frost ribbons inside my brain, Canals push up my leg. I m moving on To what the world needs me to know. I am the angel trapped inside the bullet. I am the exit wound trapped inside the angel. Am I the scarecrow Perched at the end of the human trail. I ll palm cotton between my prayers Until the universe has passed, Waving down jellyfish To volcano hours. What force propels a bullet From its chamber. Is it sourced by water Trickling in a karst cave, Or is it an angel s gasp as she flees. I can t answer it all, But my mask grows taller every year.

It isn't true about the lambs. They are not meek. They are curious and wild, full of the passion of spring. They are lovable, they are not silent when hungry. Tonight the last of the triplet lambs is piercing the quiet with its need. Its siblings are stronger and will not let it eat. I am its keeper, the farmer, its mother, I will go down to it in the dark, in the cold barn, and hold it in my arms. but it will not lie still it is not meek. I will stand in the open doorway under the weight of watching trees and moon, and care for it as one of my own. But it will not love me it is not meek. Drink, little one. Take what I can give you. Tonight the whole world prowls the perimeters of your life. Your anger keeps you alive  it's your only chance. So I know what I must do after I have fed you.   I will shape my mouth to the shape of the sharpest words, even those bred in silence. I will inhale with words every ear pressed upon open air. I will not be meek. You remind me of the necessity of having more hope than fear, and of sounding out terrible names. I am to cry out loud like a hungry lamb, cry loud enough to waken wolves in the night. No one can be allowed to sleep.

      1 The Saturday morning meadowlark came in from high up with her song gliding into tall grass still singing. How I'd like to glide around singing in the summer then to go south to where I already was and find fields full of meadowlarks in winter. But when walking my dog I want four legs to keep up with her as she thunders down the hill at top speed then belly flops into the deep pond. Lark or dog I crave the impossible. I'm just human. All too human.       2 I was nineteen and mentally infirm when I saw the prophet Isaiah. The hem of his robe was as wide as the horizon and his trunk and face were thousands of feet up in the air. Maybe he appeared because I had read him so much and opened too many ancient doors. I was cooking my life in a cracked clay pot that was leaking. I had found secrets I didn't deserve to know. When the battle for the mind is finally over it's late June, green and raining.       3 A violent windstorm the night before the solstice. The house creaked and yawned. I thought the morning might bring a bald earth, bald as a man's bald head but not shiny. But dawn was fine with a few downed trees, the yellow rosebush splendidly intact. The grass was all there dotted with Black Angus cattle. The grass is indestructible except to fire but now it's too green to burn. What did the cattle do in this storm? They stood with their butts toward the wind, erect Buddhists waiting for nothing in particular. I was in bed cringing at gusts, imagining the contents of earth all blowing north and piled up where the wind stopped, the pile sky-high. No one can climb it. A gopher comes out of a hole as if nothing happened.         4 The sun should be a couple of million miles closer today. It wouldn't hurt anything and anyway this cold rainy June is hard on me and the nesting birds. My own nest is stupidly uncomfortable, the chair of many years. The old windows don't keep the weather out, the wet wind whipping my hair. A very old robin drops dead on the lawn, a first for me. Millions of birds die but we never see it they like privacy in this holy, fatal moment or so I think. We can't tell each other when we die. Others must carry the message to and fro. "He's gone," they'll say. While writing an average poem destined to disappear among the millions of poems written now by mortally average poets.       5 Solstice at the cabin deep in the forest. The full moon shines in the river, there are pale green northern lights. A huge thunderstorm comes slowly from the west. Lightning strikes a nearby tamarack bursting into flame. I go into the cabin feeling unworthy. At dawn the tree is still smoldering in this place the gods touched earth.

Why not write something for those who scratched out improbable livings here? Someone has managed to sow This broken field with stones, it appears,   So someone s scratching it still, Although that Japanese knotweed has edged The tilth. Two wasps in the child Attempt to catch sun on a rail of the bridge.   The old local doctor has passed At almost a full decade past ninety. He never seemed depressed. Seventy now, if barely,   I consider the field again: Someone will drag these rocks away But they ll be back. The air smells like rain, Which is fine, the summer s been much too dry.   Nothing is left of the barn But some rusty steel straps in some nasty red osier. The stone fence still looks sound, But even there the knotweed steps over.   Hadn t I pledged an elegy To the old ones who worked here? You couldn t claim They thrived, exactly, but maybe They likewise scented good wind full of rain,   Lifted eyes above this old orchard To the cloud-darkened hills and found their support Somehow, somewhere. No matter, They kept going until they could go no more.   The trees  puckered apples have gathered A flock of birds, and as they alight, They re full of unseasonable chatter, As if to say that all will be right.   The old ones I promised a poem Must have said it too. It ll be all right.It ll be all right. I never knew them. They re gone. I say it out loud, It ll be all right.It ll be all right.      Caledonia County, VermontCaledonia County, Vermont

If I die, you say you will let your hair turn silver, grow long, and you will go into the dark place, for you ve already begun to forget what Mecca means. Where we come from, you and I,maqam means home, means music; the Qur anmaqam can only be read as a song; a sheikh recites the FatihaFatiha as if he has built a house among the lines, the ayas.ayas We ve both called our daughters Aya, and when they ask about their name, we play holy verses for them, listen to how the sheikh lingers long enough on each letter, how the audience claps and whistles   Is it Umm Kulthum?Is it Umm Kulthum? our daughters ask. He knows all his maqamat,maqamat this sheikh, says God is greater, and Allah, Allah,God is greaterAllah, Allah reply the faithful and the unfaithful alike, for the earth is such a small planet, and look, there is Ithaca, almost always on the horizon    float, my friend. Ithaca   It is rough, but raises goodIt is rough, but raises goodmen, says Homer, but oh, the women, the womenmen know how to house the bodies of the drowned. They sing,In the Name of the Cross, of God, the Merciful. A childIn the Name of the Cross, of God, the Merciful in Syria has amputated legs because he has ventured into a minefield to eat grass. He still has two eyes, two arms, a mouth. God is greater, is greater, stayGod is greater, is greater with me in the light a little longer. You light two cigarettes at the same time, give me one. Tomorrow you will fly to Lesbos to translate. The refugees will say shai, and you will sayshaitea, home, Mecca, Ithaca, maqam, maqam, maqam.tea, home, Mecca, Ithaca, maqam, maqam, maqam

                           this is                           exactly                        the kind                        of space                       I want to            follow you into       holding your little mute worm on a twig make it marble make it touch like tough winter in the next life we will have longer love better places with extended embraces now we leave the song to return to the front     leaf closing on closeness of     mothers in the next worldoverseeing premiumoverseeing premiumwaste of the planetwaste of the planetreincarnatereincarnateanywhereanywherebut herebut here    land on a different rim

I am locked in a little cedar box with a picture of shepherds pasted onto the central panel between carvings. The box stands on curved legs. It has a gold, heart-shaped lock and no key. I am trying to write my way out of the closed box redolent of cedar. Satan comes to me in the locked box and says, I ll get you out. SayI ll get you out. SayMy father is a shit. I sayMy father is a shit.  my father is a shit and Satan laughs and says, It s opening.It s opening.Say your mother is a pimp.Say your mother is a pimp. My mother is a pimp. Something opens and breaks when I say that. My spine uncurls in the cedar box like the pink back of the ballerina pin with a ruby eye, resting beside me on satin in the cedar box.Say shit, say death, say fuck the father,Say shit, say death, say fuck the father, Satan says, down my ear. The pain of the locked past buzzes in the child s box on her bureau, under the terrible round pond eye etched around with roses, where self-loathing gazed at sorrow. Shit. Death. Fuck the father. Something opens. Satan saysDon t you feel a lot better?Don t you feel a lot better? Light seems to break on the delicate edelweiss pin, carved in two colors of wood. I love him too, you know, I say to Satan dark in the locked box. I love them but I m trying to say what happened to us in the lost past. Of course, he saysOf course,  and smiles, of course. Now say: torture. of course. Now say: torture.  I see, through blackness soaked in cedar, the edge of a large hinge open.Say: the father s cock, the mother sSay: the father s cock, the mother scunt, says Satan, I ll get you out.cunt, I ll get you out. The angle of the hinge widens until I see the outlines of the time before I was, when they were locked in the bed. When I say the magic words, Cock, Cunt, Satan softly says, Come out.Come out. But the air around the opening is heavy and thick as hot smoke.Come in, he says, and I feel his voiceCome in,  breathing from the opening. The exit is through Satan s mouth.Come in my mouth, he says, you re thereCome in my mouth, you re therealready, and the huge hingealready,  begins to close. Oh no, I loved them, too, I brace my body tight in the cedar house. Satan sucks himself out the keyhole. I m left locked in the box, he seals the heart-shaped lock with the wax of his tongue.It s your coffin now, Satan says.It s your coffin now,  I hardly hear; I am warming my cold hands at the dancer s ruby eye  the fire, the suddenly discovered knowledge of love.

We are not sitting in the train anymore as passengers with different destinations you pulled me off at your station and I pulled you off at mine here we stand each in the other s light and are mistakable    Translated from the GermanTranslated from the GermanTranslated from the GermanTranslated from the German

There is no radical shift of light or redwings calling areas of marsh their territories yet, nor plovers probing for copepods. Only a yellow front-end loader laying out a new berm on the beach, from tubes too heavy to be called hoses, its audience one man and his protesting dog. No frosted wedding cake on tour, no Cap n Beauregard hailing us from the Texas deck, no Texas deck, just an unshaven crew launching zodiacs from the county dredge, its twin stacks staining itself and the air with smoke, as battered an emblem of hope as any other. So spring comes to Egg Island, squealing and unwilling. Sulfur and diesel, flywheel, gear and grind until one morning the equinox dawns and silences the whole shebang.

A creamy tear descended here when Cupid squeezed the teat of Venus. Dripping down the Milky Way it puddled beneath old oak, new pine. Love s selfish thirst did pluck a cosmic note, set every entombed entangled bit of me in roots both new and old to singing. I was become in earth and by harmony a million bits of tongue and ear, sound funnels upwhorled in song conducting cones. Fresh music from old flesh corrected my (most melancholy) record of this last go round the planet. Now I was first things: elementals, vegetable and mineral in form, dust to kick it on the breeze, loam to feed old oak, new pine, Eros-greedy energy on hunt for nourishment, cream to suck, breast to squeeze.

An hour inland from Bangor, Maine, over rolling hills, in an oval pasture surrounded by giant conifers, the forest floor bejeweled with ruby-studded mushrooms, I watch the sheep sing, if bleating could be called a song. Maybe someone in a grove long ago saw a man attached to a beast of burden and so the concept of the satyr was born. Memory is the past reversed. I once went out with a sailor, a Spaniard, from Andaluc a. We met at sea where I worked the roulette wheel in the ship s casino. His legs were slightly bowed, his voice gruff and torn, and when he came the sound seemed to climb up not from his throat but from his feet smelling of earth and sea and grief  a deep song Lorca called duende.duende It wasn t pretty. His blue and red and purple briefs soaking in a bucket by the cabin door. He told me once when he was a boy his grandmother had caught him trying to fuck a chicken. The poor chicken,The poor chicken he laughed, his saddle-worn Andaluc an laugh, feathers flying everywhere, his grandmother screaming. And what to call those half-human, half-chicken kinds of days: scratching and clawing at the earth, bathed in dust, trying not to think about the simmering anise, peppercorn, and broth. When I visited him, he met me at the airport. Then the long train  ride south through field after field of sunflowers. Por la tarde familiesPor la tarde paraded, por la noche, only menpor la noche and boys and extranjeras foreign women extranjeras out past sunset. In an empty disco six or seven guys danced, throwing themselves around madly, slamming into each other to Blondie s  Heart of Glass.  Franco had died a few years back. From my window that night, a full moon, shadows of the town square, the boarded-up cathedral, a cat in heat, the smell of blood oranges. In the morning his grandmother, all in black, asleep stooped in a chair outside my door. Nearby the ruins of an ancient Roman temple, goats on hind legs eating the pale green leaves from olive trees.

The streets of San Francisco are littered with bodies of bank robbers & mobsters prostitutes & pimps   Bullet holes in foreheads   Clothes covered with that fake orange blood they used in the seventies   Just pretend dead   No sirens (those will be dubbed in later)   Camera pans an immaculate city   Mid-morning weekday only a few tourists about (everyone else is at work)   Light traffic on bridges   Newly erected Pyramid dominates the scene   Sky Maya blue perpetually wiped clean by low-flying clouds   Come nightfall even the junkies in the Haight & strippers in North Beach will have a kind of innocence   Just extras on the set   As close to Utopia as you could get in 1973   & now only attainable in a Dirty Harry movieDirty Harry  

In this restaurant a plate of bluefish p t  and matzos begin memorable meals.   The cracker is ridged, seems planked, an old wall streaked sepia, very nearly black in Tigrett, Tennessee   where it burned   into a matzo s twin. While waiting for a Martha s Vineyard salad, I rebuild the church with crackers, p t  as paste   as a flaming dessert arrives at another table where diners are ready for a second magnum of champagne; every day is an anniversary; every minute, a commemoration so there is no reason to ever be sober   to excuse incendiaries who gave up the bottle, threw alcohol at the church, spectacular reform   in flames themselves ordinary there d been fire in that church many times, every Sunday and even at the Thursday choir rehearsals. For years there d been a fired-up congregation   so seething, neighborhoods they marched through ignited no matter their intention; just as natural as summer. There were hot links as active as telephone lines whose poles mark the countryside as if the nation is helpless without a crucifix every few yards; pity they are combustible   and that fire itself is holy, that its smoke merges with atmosphere, that we breathe its residue, that when it is thick and black enough to believe in, it betrays and chokes us; pity that it is the vehicle that proves the coming of the Lord, the establishment of his kingdom, his superiority because fire that maintains him disfigures us; when we try to embrace him; we find ourselves out on a limb    burning.  The meal   tastes divine, simply divine and I eat it in the presence of a companion dark as scab, as if skin burned off was replaced as he healed with this total-body scab   under which he is pink as a pig, unclean at least through Malachi.   In my left hand, a dash of Lot s wife; in my right, a mill to freshly grind the devil, since fire is power both the supreme good and supreme evil are entitled to it; most of the time, what did it matter who was in charge of Job?     Both burnt him.  

Every day in summer I'd cross the border; he'd nod, pick up the horseshoes, hand me one, triple the size of my palm, and say, You first. We'd playYou first away the afternoon. Few words punctuated the clank of horseshoe against stake, until the fog rolled in and I'd retrace my steps home. I was five or six; he, white haired, however old that meant. One evening my father sat me down, spoke in the exaggerated tone adults adapt for children, asked if I knew who he was.he Admiral Nimitz, of course, though I knew nothing of his command of the Pacific Fleet and was less impressed than if he'd landed a horseshoe. He was a calm man, a useful attribute for sending young men to their deaths. The only time I saw him upset, raccoons had invaded from their hideouts in the hills, attacked the goldfish in his pond, leaving muddy footprints as they escaped. As far as I knew, this was his only defeat.

Department of Trance Department of Dream of Levitation Department of White Fathom Department of Winding Sometimes my son orders me lie down I like when he orders me lie down          close your eyeslie down          close your eyes Department of Paper Laid Gentry Department of Sound of Sheets of Paper                                                                            he covers me with then sings I like best the smallest sounds he makes then Department of This Won t Sting Am I slipping away Department of Violet Static as if he were a distant station Department of Satellite My child says you sleepyou sleep Department of Infinitely Flexible Web and covers my face with blankness Department of Tap-Tapping the Vein Department of Eyelash I can t speak                            or even blink                                                       or the page laid over my face will fall Department of Clear Tape in Whorls and Double Helixes on the Wall He says Mama don t look Mama don t look  Department of You Won t Feel a Thing I cannot behold Department of Pinprick He will not behold Department of Veils and Chimes of Lungs Afloat in Ether   I like this best Department of Spider Vein when I am most like dead and being with him then, Department of Notes Struck from Thin Glasses Successively at Random I must explain to my child that sleep                                                                     is not the same as dead Department of Borderlessness so that he may not be afraid of Department of Fingertips Lightly on Eyelids so I can lie and listen not holding not carrying not working Department of Becalmed             faint sound of him                                                                                                    I am gone   His song is the door back to the room   I am composed of the notes  

It is a tragedy, yes, but a confusing one. What happened to the wrestlers and where have they gone? Loulou the Pomeranian would love to know. Outdoors the hills are buried in snow, but inside a rose, a rose full-blown, a roomful of rose. The bloom and its shadow overtaking the space. The bloom proposing an impossible tomb. Of the Tachists, the master said to his friend Harry,  They paint white on white, and they believe that this is an achievement.  Harry said,   I dare you to paint a white rose in a white room with a window looking onto a landscape covered with snow.  Now this   which even Loulou, color-blindish, can tell is red   is the master s grandiose response to an intoxicating challenge. Synesthetically, the rose fills Loulou s pom ears with the echoes of torch songs, longing for the wrong. Loulou is practically drunk from the smell: a heady pink, and juicy, and almost obscene. Like crushed up candies, lingering and sweet, but with an adult musk at the core: a powerful flower. In looking, Loulou s heart becomes a house at dusk about to force  something to happen.

My friend they don't care if you're an individualist a leftist  a rightist a shithead or a snake They will try to exploit you absorb you  confine you disconnect you  isolate you or kill you And you will disappear into your own rage into your own insanity into your own poverty into a word a phrase a slogan a cartoon and then ashes The ruling class will tell you that there is no ruling class as they organize their liberal supporters into white supremacist lynch mobs organize their children into ku klux klan gangs organize their police into killer cops organize their propaganda into a device to ossify us with angel dust preoccupy us with western symbols in african hair styles inoculate us with hate institutionalize us with ignorance hypnotize us with a monotonous sound designed to make us evade reality and stomp our lives away And we are programmed to self-destruct to fragment to get buried under covert intelligence operations of unintelligent committees impulsed toward death And there it is The enemies polishing their penises between oil wells at the pentagon the bulldozers leaping into demolition dances the old folks dying of starvation the informers wearing out shoes looking for crumbs the life blood of the earth almost dead in the greedy mouth of imperialism And my friend they don't care if you're an individualist a leftist  a rightist a shithead or a snake They will spray you with a virus of legionnaire's disease fill your nostrils with the swine flu of their arrogance stuff your body into a tampon of toxic shock syndrome try to pump all the resources of the world into their own veins and fly off into the wild blue yonder to pollute another planet And if we don't fight if we don't resist if we don't organize and unify and get the power to control our own lives Then we will wear the exaggerated look of captivity the stylized look of submission the bizarre look of suicide the dehumanized look of fear and the decomposed look of repression forever and ever and ever And there it is

You know, the white guy In the film version of Raisin In The Sun,Raisin In The Sun Pudgy balding head, Who comes to tell The black family Not to move to the White Chicago suburb. The man who smiles With the knife, Who IS a knife, But fools them for A second, because They re looking at him The way he expects Them to look at him. Later, as they mop Up the blood, they replay What he said: that he Was elected by his neighbors, Because he s the guy that Can get his foot in the door, Whipped and rumpled, Like he s been apologizing Since he popped out of his Mother s womb, like he s a Close, personal friend of sorry.   He s sorry now, in his wilted suit. This is the way the knife Gets through the door, and He sits there, as they Think, maybe he ain t a Knife in sheep clothes, baaa Baaa, baaa; such a foolish-looking, Goofy little white guy. A small part of them, quietly Embarrassed they re even Thinking that about him. They can barely hold their Manners in check, and that s His trick, the trick of the knife You don t see until you re cut. And the strangest thing About this, the damn thing Is how meek he still looks After he cuts, and cuts again. Dun as a female robin, His tongue slices and whittles. He is singing the song of his Brood; money if you stay, Fire if you come, as they think: How did a white robe, a tinder cross, And goon s club trot through Their door? A pack of Dobermans Couldn t have done a neater job, Except that Dobermans of course, never Apologize.

     I. The Spirit Box    Son:  A son is a steadfast A son is a steadfast keeper of secrets,keeper of secrets,  a cupped palm, a calyx,a cupped palm, a calyx,a son is a spirit box, listen a son is a spirit box, listen    I was born after armistice, the fissured cities,   but slept nights with a human smoke.   And though I never shuddered from a black rouge   of rationed coffee to keep clean,   the frost and sullen mud of a forced march,   the unspoken, the unspeakable, became my life:   I was a boy bathed in dreams by a menorah fashioned against   the penalty of death, a mysterious klezmer.  A son is a spirit box, imagine.A son is a spirit box, imagine.          II. Riders on the Back of Silence   Son:   As a boy, my old-world aunts and uncles would weep when I entered the room:   What did I have to do with sadness? Their cryptic tears   and purse-tucked Kleenex were my own tantalizing   Hardy Boys case to crack. Gradually, as a junior detective, I grasped   how much I resembled an uncle lost in the war,   and like the savvy, querying boy at the Passover Seder   become a scrupulous man, an inquisitive reporter,   I set out to track my look-alike s, my family s wartime destiny    What my father marshaled against, what my mother endured,   the unspoken, the unspeakable, became my mission:   though I was born in a venomless time and suburb,   phantoms, chimeras breathed in our never-quite-here-and-now house,   secret calendars of fire: Mother, I dreamed we were   riders on the back of silence, the wild unsaid beneath us:  horse, whale,horse, whale,behemoth.behemoth.   We never spoke of the war. So with stark reading,   a well-thumbedDiary of Anne Frank,Diary of Anne Frank,   I resolved to imagine pitiless showers,   whips and watchtowers of brute commanders,   their Gypsy-less, Jew-less, jerry-rigged heaven.          III. The Photojournalist   Son:   In my search for your cloud-wrapped past, Mother,   the wounded earth became mine, and each time I aligned myself   with the exiled, the dispossessed, I aligned myself with you.   Apprenticed to, obsessed with, light and justice,   always I ve tried to bring into focus a girl, with war as her spur,   with hunger as her horse and shadow    Mother, in El Salvador I couldn t lift my camera   to capture the unearthed bodies of silenced nuns:   I m almost, but never quite, inured to death:   a child in a jacket of flies; the last typed lines of a friend,   a dissident poet whose body was opened beyond belief    In the Secret Annex, in the countless precincts of strife, I ve learned   an Esperanto of blood and hope and forbearance,   as if someday I might receive my wish: to read, on a night as serene as truce,   your long-awaited story: the capo s unrelenting curses,   a castaway s pain: I should know it by heart, Mother.          IV. The Antimiracle   Mother:   At the spring s start, there were fists rather than fragrance,   April-upon-April hope braided with arrests and betrayals,   as dark as the derided spaces in our censored mail.   Garrisons, watchtowers, checkpoints as daunting as Gorgons,   proliferated. The borders became too-tight belts    Long after the white of truce, in restless sleep I struggled   to awaken the family dead, to confess, unabashed:   Lampshades of sullied flesh, linens fashioned of human hair    I was not prepared to stand outside humanity           V. The Pet Name   Son:   Soft as a fontanel,Dove was the pet nameDove    you gave me as a boy, and on the world s battlefields,   like a drop of holy water, its bolstering sweetness   became my talisman. It was with me, mitigating, winged,   shielding me somehow, as my lover Jaeger s lens shattered   and his lifeblood soaked into my shirt.   It was with me, a thousand leagues from God,   when I photographed a gassed village    whole families and their livestock hushed   as if by an invisible hand, as if some heedless, insane baker   had dusted the afternoon with flour.          VI. Trains   Mother:   Today, amid the earliest birdcalls, the first neighborhood sounds,   I swept the stoop, leaned on the trusty broom,   and wondered: If I could write, son, about those years,   where would I begin?  Your grandfather was a stationmaster,   tall as a flagpole and as taciturn.   And though his owl-gray eyes have gone to earth,   I keep thinking he ll round the corner in his fastidious clothes,   carrying a sprig of asphodel or fragrant honeysuckle    so dignified with his gold spectacles and timetables.   God took him the Sabbath before the shouts and stones, the smashed   storefronts of Kristallnacht.Kristallnacht. How it would ve angered him to see   that his beloved trains were used to betray us.          VII. Dove s Arc   Mother:   For years I dreamed maternal dreams of your cozy security    spacious freedom from pogroms, all the misery the wide,   unmerciful world doles out to Jews and scapegoats,   and always you seemed determined to court danger    So you want to know about a prisoner s,   a H ftling s dignity?H ftling This is what it meant:   at the roll call, some anchoring wish    or a shared shoe, a black rouge of rationed   coffee in the camp, to dodge selection for the flames ...   Truth to tell: there s barely been a day   when the filth of the barracks, the fury of the camps   didn t obsess my heart; But I will go with you to Birkenau,   near the slain beasts of the old crematoriums,   where everywhere you walk, you are walking on human ash.   I want to leave something sturdy in this world,   maybe a book of live-to-tell truth,   grace and vitamins, for those to come.   More than anything, son, what I ve wanted to tell you:   there was a woman of courage in the camp,   and she shepherded me, kindled me to keep me alive.   A clear light seemed to shore her (as if we were seeing   a one-woman sunrise, an unstoppable human dawn),   so that she garnered strength to share her meager scraps,   strength to carry the ones still minus an alphabet,   making up soothing rhymes, little puddles of sound...   Like so many, she died of typhus.   And after liberation, in the DP camp,   amid the chaos, I prayed my children would inherit   a portion of her spirit. And it s true,   you have some of her fearlessness, her passion, you do.   Son, why didn t I see it before? How my hardscrabble prayer,   in it s dove s arc, was answered.  

                               It is said that after losing his wife, Orpheus was torn to                pieces by Maenads, who threw his head into the River                Hebron. The head went on singing and forgetting,                filling up with water and floating way. Eurydice                                                   already forgetting who she isalready forgetting who she is with her shoes missing and the grass coming up through her feet searching the earth                           for the bracelet of tiny weave on her charcoal wristthe name of a fly or flower             already forgetting who they arethe name of a fly or flower              they grow they grow                        till their bodies break their necks down there in the stone world where the grey spirits of stones he around uncertain of their limits matter is eating my mind                                I am in a river                                            I in my fox-cap floating between the speechless reeds I always wake like this being watched  already forgetting who I am the water wears my mask                              I call  I callI call  I call lying under its lashes like a glance   if only a child on a bridge would hoik me out   there comes a tremor and there comes a pause down there in the underworld where the tired stones have fallen and the sand in a trance lifts a little                          it is always midnight in those pools iron insects engraved in sleep                                                I always wake like this being watched   I always speak to myself                          no more myself but a colander draining the sound from this never-to-be mentioned wound can you hear it you with your long shadows and your short shadows   can you hear the severed head of Orpheus   no I feel nothing from the neck down   already forgetting who I am the crime goes on without volition singing in its bone                        not I not I                                                 the water drinks my mind   as if in a black suit                         as if bent to my books                         only my face exists sliding over a waterfall and there where the ferns hang over the dark and the midges move between mirrors some woman has left her shoes                                                  two crumpled mouths                           which my voice searches in and out my voice being water which holds me together and also carries me away until the facts forget themselves gradually like a contrail and all this week                         a lime-green hght troubles the riverbed                         as if the mud was haunted by the wood this is how the wind works hard at thinking this is what speaks when no one speaks

I brought what I knew about the world to my daily life and it failed me. I brought senseless accidents and a depravity sprung inside the jaw. Also I brought what I had learned of love, an air of swift entrance and exit, a belief in trouble and desire. It will amount to something I was told, and I was told to hold fast to decency, to be spotlit and confident. I was told next year s words await another voice. But you are a hard mouth to speak to and if I write the list it will be free of constancy. It will include fierce birds, false springs, a few oil lamps that need quickly to be lit. Also dusk and weeds and a sleep that permits utter oblivion from our stranded century. This is not a natural world, and if there are recoveries from confusion, they pass like rains. I don t look to the robins for solace; neither do I trust that to make an end is to make a beginning. If we are not capable of company, we can at least both touch the quartet inside evening, the snow inside the willow, the bewildering kinship of ice and sky. But as I walked I saw crows ripping at shapes on the street, a square of sunlight flare on the roof. Take my hand, if only here and not in the time that remains for us to spend together. We will stand and watch the most delicate weathers move, second by second, through the grim neighborhood. I will lean into you, who have loved me in your way, knowing where you are and what you care for.

One thing I m not doing in my poems: reporting on anything that really happened.   When I say I m from New York, Glaswegians say,  Oh, I love Woody Allen.  They cannot construe how large a state can be. I just happen to actually be from Manhattan.   How impractical, to imagine that a structure like a government would be responsive to the needs of such a lot of people. Held like in a holding pen.   In the early 1990s I saw a yellow Indian drunk in a tattoo parlor in Seattle. He literally said he could literally see right through me. If he said it figuratively I took it literally.   A lot of people in America do not want regulation from the government. In principle: our forefathers, our persecution. Ideally we wouldn t need industries and individual actions to be regulated. We wouldn t even need laws.   People, including people who run corporations or work for them, would just behave responsibly. Corporations would take the responsibility of personhood seriously.   My mother cannot be trusted to restrict me from buying R-rated videogames at the porn store.   My mother struggled to love me the firstborn had been so tractable she still struggles to love me can she be commanded to love me? Now I see what those commandments are about. There must be a God.   Objectively we could expect that our family members would go out of their way to behave toward us with extra care, concern, and with love.   Sometimes there is a harsh disjunction between what objective perception would suggest to us we might expect and what really takes place, or  occurs,  within the framework of what we call  our lives.    I really saw the other day for the first time that my mother did not naturally take to me I am not much like her. It would take an effort for her to understand what matters to me. (Her love will come around.)   My own daughter is quite different from me I think it s hard to tell, she is only five years old. But she looks different takes after her father, as I t took after mine and so far her concerns are not my own. She loves pink. I hate pink. (My love moves faster.)   Where would that moral activity come from, to behave responsibly toward others? Not to overcharge, not to seek loopholes, not to dominate, not to oppress. Does anyone consciously oppress? I guess some spousal abuse comes from the pure urge to dominate, and the ire that results when that domination is resisted, or thwarted . . .   But is it a pure urge or is it coming from an inscribed narrative of gendered hierarchy? Like a man wearing a wife-beater has been told too many times that his wife is supposed to listen to him and obey him. Now if he can be told by the government that  My Strength Is Not for Hurting,  a local billboard campaign, maybe that will ring in his ears when he lifts his fist.   If the government doesn t do it, who will do it? The church used to do it, and still does. The one time I went to church, with my mother, in Tennessee, when we were at a family reunion and the whole family had certain activities, and one of them was  church on Sunday,  I was brought to tears by the simple goodness of the message that the pastor, or reverend  minister? this was a Methodist church was preaching. It was Father s Day, actually, and he talked about how fathers ought to make sure to spend time with their kids. Turn off the TV, he said, and spend some time with your kids.   I was crying because I am not used to an experience of shared instruction in goodness. It was very moving to be in a room with real people all receiving the same instruction.

comes wave after wave after wave the derivative & harvest, the myrtle tops of sandstorms & milk glasses, apple, horse & song, list, listen, light leaks from the spaces between the bubbles   call it foam   tender pocket of yes yes yes call it flesh   eat tonight & you ll still have to eat tomorrow, eat tonight & it still won t be over   eat tonight: peaches bloom even in the dark, as wet as a girl   hands & feet, horse & song, the same hole bandaged over & over, not a wound but its absence   a sum of histories   the nights colliding like marbles, & if there is an end then it s too dark to see, if there is an end then it s too bright to see, hands folding, unfolding, & you, Scheherazade!, milky goddess of recursion, best DJ in the city, you spin records, spin heads, cross legs & cross deserts, & always pause just moments before heyes yes yes&

Pepper blacks the pan so never shake it near me. Wait for the flagrant animation in my bedroom, in my bed base. In mountaineering situations sleep swaddled, wake ecstatic my frantic menus in your mind. I taste of them all. Refuse to refuse me. Waste your time on my errands. Squeeze your lime on my lemons. Turn up wearing the whole bird not just the feathers.

If you can't wait to pick a book right now And read it through until the very end To find out who did what, and why, and how, Then lucky you! you're a READER, my friend!  

    Broadway past Lincoln      Center and the wind   is up so seems      to speaksaw yousaw you        through the glassthrough the glassstanding in linestanding in line      I swear a quiverI swear a quiver  playedplayed      on your lipson your lipsyou wereyou were        leafing through his book leafing through his book   years      it s been years   since Corona      Heights, backing into him: dribble,        hook, swish   that beige      comfy couch,   sipping a stem      of wine, his cat in my lap   * * *   The Townhouse Saturday night shoulder   to shoulder pushing toward the piano he   stops to squeeze by; his eyes  mine   clench  unclench   What was it we found   in common over drink   smoke   talk?   A college campus  his son, his daughter     * * *   Earlier that night I rose to the city s surface steam through the grate, crossed crossed again down 7th   past Carnegie Hall, the greek joint as imagined, chic  unlike the shirt D wore (the fur   of his arms) at Castro and Market waiting for the light: words were struck like steel and flint   that distant August day Then his visit to Spain, mine to New Canaan walking through the Morgan   with him. And what our mouths unfurled across a table of olives years later last night    Dropping me off at 58th he reaches for the door I m fumbling to open, leans close and plants   what I ve missed   all these years  

And where my organ of veneration should be  wormwood and gall. Grudge sliver. Wailbone, iron, bitters. I mean to say the miniature waterfalls have all dried up in this miniature place where day is duty cubed, time is time on task and every mind optimized for compliance. Time to delint my black denim traveling stuff. The flourescent major highlighter has dimmed to minor. I'm so dying I wrote when I meant to write so tired. And when I sleep I dream only that I'm sleeping. Please see my black stuff's dusted off. Night has no dilution anxieties, but only the infinites are happy: Math. Time. Everything happy goes to many decimal places while flesh passes through gradations of glory. I visualized it, the nurse said of the bedsore. Everything exists at the courtesy of everything else. Please see that my grave is kept clean. Beloveds, finite things in which the infinite endangered itself, excarnate to memory and the divine substance has limited liability. You're kind, I tell the infinite. Too kind.

THE DEEP EVENING-COLORED ROSE of the sea is closing. Sweet crude oil, orange as rust, finds an open pathway into the marsh. And what you thought would be your home, lush with grasses, is no home, drives you out into the gray-glazed gates of sleep. Blood flowers where we don t see it. And every chance event is a high note racing from stars in sea-depths of brightness, and every shock we feel we feel only with the slack ropes of our arms. Someone wants to hide the body of oil and cannot. Someone wants to hide their hands from shame. Shark, dolphin, manatee, fish, each slick skin an undreamt tine threading its red flute-dusk through fumes. Sound of the flood-dark pulse. Then the second when the water makes no sound.     THE OLD VANDALS WERE FLOODS AND BOATS eroding the banks. The islands that once dotted the bays have sunk, disappearing into silverish grit, thinned into algae and filament now being made quiet by plumes. Despite ourselves we are made quiet. The death of the sea a thing we must lower ourselves into to imagine. I will stay with you here inside the sheen of orange that quickly kills, not like the saltwater slowly starving the freshwater- marshes and grasses that knit this green-wet world together. The two breathless gannets found covered in oil are not unlike you, at the mercy of a mercy that moves in plumes, that insists certain fates remain invisible. What existed before the oil arrived was delicate and mired, a broom of moonlight swept through half-choked waves. I trust you if you wish for what it, too, might have been.     LEADING INTO THE BAY are soft green expanses of grasses, saltwater channels, slicks not glimpsed here before. The birds bathe where they can, in half-damp shadows that make possible the next free climb into air. There is nothing beyond our means to feel it  oil pushing up to the surface where the surface-dwellers die, turtles pulling in from the Gulf for nesting. If I close my eyes I can hear the faint blue traces of blood over-gathered by oil and the sound of ice near the seafloor.   There will be a time when nothing living moves, a degradation of stillness beyond any liquid scar. Still, the solutions of despair are weak if you believe you can touch an undersea reef, the belly of a small wounded whale. You have the power to feel it. The breath of the animal moving like trust into your arms.     BEFORE THE HOUR WHEN THE COAST slid into ocean we thought we saw a patch of sun greening in waves. The slip of a fish. There was a need so deep in our bodies we could not even weep. We called for an end and that end did not come. Power after power, our machine tools and cutting tools did nothing to hold back the brown clouds rippling in chaotic columns toward the light. And what the skies mean, passing over beds of tarred seaweed, feels unutterable, like the darkness around a candle. Where had we hoped to live? You came into the month with dreams. You walked on those beaches even though you knew they were sick. The bird that sought the reeds to die in, the fish gill-soaked with oils  you gathered them into yourself as if you alone could bring back their flickering. And overhead the novae exploded toward you along tracks of gas and dust, and the fields of ocean rose into you, and the crabs broke from their cancer fossils in masses of tiny flowers and you felt inside you the islands re-arise, flushed from the thickening imbalance of the earth. (Is there some refuge beyond ourselves that is vast enough? The sea is without grief. As are the days.)

Because you re gone, I take a book to bed:The Flame of Passion. Scabbard at his thigh,The Flame of Passion Lord Henry gets the girl. You d only buy top Booklist picks.  The romance genre s dead,  you d say when promises of I-thee-wed lured me to bargain bins. I learned to lie about my day, hoard Harlequins on the sly while you were off at work, your office spread with red-inked proofs. But now it makes me yawn to read beyond the lovers  wedding night. I close The Flame, not even halfway through.The Flame His sword grows dull while she goes on and on about how lovers must stay true. I d write another ending, if I could, for you.

A king did not die, a president was not acquitted, a balloon did not fly around the world in twenty days, at 84 with white hair, Joe DiMaggio was not mourned. And air strikes launched street to street in order to bring peace, or a doctor convicted of doctoring death? No, and no, nothing happened, except flowers purple the year before bloomed white, but no viruses named after women spread across the globe, and the word  columbine  did not enter the consciousness of a nation. What about the bomb that made a mistake, or the famous son of a famous president mistaking the ocean for the sky? That year, the weather was unpredictable, that happened, and if anything else did, like shots fired at people praying, no one heard them, and if people prayed for war to become holy, those prayers went unanswered. In Turkey, the ground split open and the 17,000 who would die, let s say, miraculously, they did not, not in 1999, the year two lifelong enemies shook hands and said there will be peace, but their palms never touched, why lie about that? Let s say the child from Cuba arrived not an orphan but with his mother, who loved and did not sink into the sea. Let s not talk about rampages, disasters, conflicts or coupes that never ruined a perfectly good year during which the sun shined on the moon, the earth, and six billion who, for once, got everything right and not a single thing wrong.

paint over thepaint over thedead end signdead end sign            are police writers?            yes they are writing into                                  books our                          little cherub of                   misunderstanding              a thinking to push us               back into body of the                                           wholelove yourself more next timelove yourself more next time                      their reports read stones sink as they please everything expands at the very end a lit cigarette into our dark hellostones sink as they pleaseeverything expands at the very enda lit cigarette intoour dark hello

Imagine that   my last words might have been spoken to the dog, she who saved my life, it has been said, spoken with no thought of reply nor of understanding, a genial insult maybe, a philosophical conundrum posed aeons before any household pet ever turned an ear. In the ambulance I made no remark about trees nor how tired I was of them, and in the second ambulance our dog s heart beat hard with terror.

Gauley Bridge is a good town for Negroes, they let us stand around, they let us stand around on the sidewalks if we re black or brown. Vanetta s over the trestle, and that s our town. The hill makes breathing slow, slow breathing after your row the river, and the graveyard s on the hill, cold in the springtime blow, the graveyard s up on high, and the town is down below. Did you ever bury thirty-give men in a place in back of your house, thirty-five tunnel workers the doctors didn t attend, died in the tunnel camps, under rocks, everywhere, world without end. When a man said I feel poorly, for any reason, any weakness or such, letting up when he couldn t keep going barely, the Cap and company come and run him off the job surely. I ve put them DOWN from the tunnel camps to the graveyard on the hill, tin-cans all about it fixed them!  TUNNELITIS hold themselves up at the side of a tree, I can go right now to that cemetery. When the blast went off the boss would call out, Come, let s go back, when that heavy loaded blast went white, Come, let s go back, telling us hurry, hurry, into the falling rocks and muck. The water they would bring had dust in it, our drinking water, the camps and their groves were colored with the dust, we cleaned our clothes in the groves, but we always had the dust. Looked like somebody sprinkled flour all over the parks and groves, it stayed and the rain couldn t wash it away and it twinkled that white dust really looked pretty down around our ankles. As dark as I am, when I came out at morning after the tunnel at night, with a white man, nobody could have told which man was white. The dust had covered us both, and the dust was white.

I lost my book. It s got the names in it. Names for things and goods; structures, Types, boundaries, procedures, goads. My girl is in it, she who carried it Within her like a rare worm Until the untended bird came And tore its leaves from her As she lay there, Pencil pressing page, Taking it all down. Then the vast storehouses came down too, And the small secret ones, The shelves and grappling hooks, Dust, ink, lead, linen, ragged board. It s time to go home and wash up. Home was in the book in my possession When I was reading what had been put down In her hand and mine, Instructions, inventories, Names. But I can t read this while looking at words While I am assigned to living In what is called a home. It is all unkept. Its yard has turned back to heat-giving Snail-like deposits drowning in daylight By the mossed-over fence post. We lived here once? We took words down for all the names, Made markings? That book is lost, reader, Not misplaced.

Often in summer, on a tarred bridge plank standing, Or downstream between willows, a safe Ophelia drifting In a rented boat   I had seen them come and go, Those wild bees swift as tigers, their gauze wings a-glitter In passionless industry, clustering black at the crevice Of a rotten cabbage tree, where their hive was hidden low.   But never strolled too near. Till one half-cloudy evening Of ripe January, my friends and I Came, gloved and masked to the eyes like plundering desperadoes, To smoke them out. Quiet beside the stagnant river We trod wet grasses down, hearing the crickets chitter And waiting for light to drain from the wounded sky.   Before we reached the hive their sentries saw us And sprang invisible through the darkening air, Stabbed, and died in stinging. The hive woke. Poisonous fuming Of sulphur filled the hollow trunk, and crawling Blue flame sputtered   yet still their suicidal Live raiders dived and clung to our hands and hair.   O it was Carthage under the Roman torches, Or loud with flames and falling timber, Troy! A job well botched. Half of the honey melted And half the rest young grubs. Through earth-black smouldering ashes And maimed bees groaning, we drew out our plunder. Little enough their gold, and slight our joy.   Fallen then the city of instinctive wisdom. Tragedy is written distinct and small: A hive burned on a cool night in summer. But loss is a precious stone to me, a nectar Distilled in time, preaching the truth of winter To the fallen heart that does not cease to fall.  

Here in Italy the buildings are the color Of dead skin and the sky is  tragic  And the rivers are brown and turbulent And everybody is always stopping by To say  Ciao!  and then  Ciao!  Ciao!   Ciao!  We think a lot about emotion, chiefly The emotion of love. There is much to cry about. And after, sleep. One falls in love So as not to fall asleep. I have just awakened To the fact that I am not in love And am about to fall asleep or write an opera In which someone falls asleep and dies Or write a letter to a friend or call somebody up To meet me later for a drink. Maybe it s too late. Tomorrow I will go out and buy something to make me happy. I remember standing in the train station in Pisa Hoping to catch the sound of an American voice In the crowd. It s good to remember such things When you think you haven t  lived  enough Because you need to learn not to regret What you ve never done. Fortunately, I remember Everything that's ever happened to me. I remember asking a woman I didn't know Whether or not she was the person I was looking for And she said,  Yes, much to my regret.  That wasn t difficult to remember Because it just happened a few minutes ago. Other things are harder. I don t remember Right away what I had for breakfast two weeks ago Last Thursday or the specific date of my first Masturbation, though I m sure that with some effort I could recover the lasting details. I remember My father using a green hair tonic called  H-A,  Which stood for  Hair Arranger.  I remember the night My father tore out a big clump of my mother's hair In an argument. They were drunk and I came out Of my room in my pajamas and asked them to stop. If I said I wanted to fall apart in someone s arms You would have to assume I was being sarcastic And you would be right. No one has arms in which I care to fall apart, at least not at the moment. Tomorrow night I am going to see a play about  A contemporary man in the process of falling apart.  I think everyone falls apart about twenty times a day. I m still confused about why I mentioned Italy At the beginning of this poem, especially since It s all a terrible lie. My students would say It means  the poet does not know where he is; Some catastrophe has distorted his perceptions.  I am drowsy but happy and resemble the corner Of a big empty room. I am drunk and staring Into the bathtub. A lot of people are standing Around listening to music. My fingers Smell like cigarettes. I am wondering If there is any way to describe the pleasure Someone derives from seeing a man s cock Shoved up someone s ass, or how one Can go on like this, even after having given up Completely to nervousness, and to death. I remember the one night I spent on a ship. The porters woke us at dawn. We stood At the railing to sight the blue and transparent island Gaping through mist in the distance. For breakfast, We ate peaches. I hated the people I was with, But I must have been incredibly stupid. We spent the day On the island, seesawed in the park, and waded in the sea.  

Day is carved in marble, a man reclining, a naked giant suffering. Preoccupied Day faces Night, who is a woman, huge, naked, Herculean, both pillowed on their uncarved rough marble bed. They need light to be seen, neither has anything to do with the sun or moon. Art is not astronomy, but the heavens are useful as gardening to poets, not useful as love or loneliness. If I write out of arrogance and ignorance a poem called Day, my chisel and mallet, words and pen, paper my marble, I must not confuse sunlight and Day, petals with hours. I could rhyme, perhaps by reason and chance describe the nature of Day. I might discover Nature is surprisingly sometimes moral, unexpected, a principle over which the lovers Night and Day quarrel. In my poem, faithful Night and faithful Day quarreled; rhyme told me they quarreled because Day is gold, Night hates the thought of celestial money, rages at the starless differences between cost and price. Michelangelo did not choose to make a sculpturePrezzo, or put the finger of God on a coin.Prezzo Day and Night saw Dana  s legs spread apart for Zeus to enter as a shower of gold. They are not household gods or saints. Better I write about things nearby, a chair, a stool, the principle I m sitting on. Day is my dictionary. If my Day were animal, he might be a baby elephant who eats leaves. My good Day stays close to his mother, who is murdered for her ivory tusks. My Day is an endangered specie. I whisper into elephant ears, peace, my darling little Day.peace, my darling little Day An owl hoots, your Day has no given name!your Day has no given name! True, I refuse names useful to many others: Sabbath, Sunday, Friday, Saturday. My Day is not baptized, circumcised, or blessed. I pick him up and hold Day in my arms. I put my head in Day s open mouth. I tongue Day, and Day tongues me. Yes, although my Day loves Night, he tongues me in and out of bed. My Day knows Night carnally, lets Night know me. So I love Day today. And I love Night tonight.

You'd think the sky would run out of water, but it won't; it just keeps coming down. I need someone to marvel at the breath escaping from me. Do you have a natural resource you prefer to exploit? Does someone think of you and turn the channel? How would you ever know? Have you ever zoned out during Downton Abbey?Downton Abbey I'm certain of something I'd prefer not to tell you about. "Slow down," you say. But I can already see my breath, and its only October. Walking with you is making everything watery and spazzed out, like a movie about sex where I have sex and people are all like, "He's amazing, we really like his sex style!" But I digress. Will you please stand up when called upon to tell the audience how wonderful I was in my best moments; like someone in senior management delegating things and being sure of everything but how to stop? I promise I'll make this up to  you. I'll write your name on the menu board, and people will come into the store all expectant of you.  

A peacock on an olive branch looks beyond the grove to the road, beyond the road to the sea, blank-lit, where a sailboat anchors to a cove. As it is morning, below deck a man is pouring water into a cup, listening to the radio-talk of the ships: barges dead in the calms awaiting port call, pleasure boats whose lights hours ago went out, fishermen setting their nets for mullet, as summer tavernas hang octopus to dry on their lines, whisper smoke into wood ovens, sweep the terraces clear of night, putting the music out with morning light, and for the breath of an hour it is possible to consider the waters of this sea wine-dark, to rememberwine-dark that there was no word for blue among the ancients, but there was the whirring sound before the oars of the great triremes sang out of the seam of world, through pine-sieved winds silvered by salt flats until they were light enough to pass for breath from the heavens, troubled enough to fell ships and darken thought    then as now the clouds pass, roosters sleep in their huts, the sea flattens under glass air, but there is nothing to hold us there: not the quiet of marble nor the luff of sail, fields of thyme, a vineyard at harvest, and the sea filled with the bones of those in flight from wars east and south, our wars, their remains scavenged on the seafloor and in its caves, belongings now a flotsam washed to the rocks. Stand here and look into the distant haze, there where the holy mountain with its thousand monks wraps itself in shawls of rain, then look to the west, where the rubber boats tipped into the tough waves. Rest your eyes there, remembering the words of Anacreon, himself a refugee of war, who appears in the writings of Herodotus:I love and do not love, I am mad and I am not mad.I love and do not love, I am mad and I am not mad. Like you he thought himself not better, nor worse than anyone else.

Has anyone described the smell of wishbones drying on the kitchen sill or the smell of glass, or the bucket of water lifted from the well we go to when death takes the last thirst from someone we love? After my mother died, sometimes I'd take the one piece of her clothing I'd kept to bed and bury my face in her flowered blouse to smell her last skin, but even from the first it was futile. What I got was the smell of goneness, the smell of screen doors where moths have spent their wing powder beating failingly to reach the light. My massage therapist said she felt grief in my body like hard empty boxes. I felt like I was always handling dough, never wanting the kneading to be done, never wanting to bake the bread that meant the end of something having to do with a mother and daughter in a kitchen. My mother has been gone for years, and I begin to see, in the spots on the backs of my hands, in the shelf my cheekbones make for my cheeks, in the way I hold my mouth against gravity's pull, that I carry her wiht me, my skin, her skin, her last skin. 

You are the start of the week or the end of it, and according to The Beatles you creep in like a nun. You're the second full day the kids have been away with their father, the second full day of an empty house. Sunday, I've missed you. I've been sitting in the backyard with a glass of Pinot waiting for your arrival. Did you know the first Sweet 100s are turning red in the garden, but the lettuce has grown too bitter to eat. I am looking up at the bluest sky I have ever seen, cerulean blue, a heaven sky no one would believe I was under. You are my witness. No day is promised. You are absolution. You are my unwritten to-do list, my dishes in the sink, my brownie breakfast, my braless day.

I confess to these feet, tethered to the earth, pulled down by force every time I jump or try to fly. Like you, an old tree sentenced us, keeps your wings  under lock and key  so we ll bicker with the birds over scraps of weather and the privilege to sing or be seen. In the dark, we scavenge midnight, make chains out of stars and bracelet shame. My biggest crime, I could not trust. I confess, I shut myself off from the one I needed and loved most. I confess, I could not be woken or accept myself to the river s basin to be washed. I m dirty, scratching love notes on the wall. Tonight, outside, winter, subzero. Too cold to snow. The neighbor next door shooting phantom deer with a handgun, his beagle tied to a tree. Over wooden bowls, we count, we ve become experts at counting. When did we make each other serial? The keys froze in the ignition: tonight the moon rises  from a ravine, a spice drawer of pickled ferment to feast. For us it s only surveillance: under surveillance we interrogate each other s mouths, pursue every laugh and cry as they twist and turn through our time, as we investigate and ransack our dog-rabbit-wolf shadows, the half ones, the whole ones, and cross-examine every intent, put hidden taps to choice appendages. In the basement, we de-crimson our one last apple, cut a tunnel through the core,  truss ourselves in aromatics, climb in and out to the garden: among the capable trees, the not-degraded weeds, the flowers released, arrested in light, we stand on strong enduring feet, confess, captives of earth, to the heart, aflame, the source  across this iced plain  the only material witness.

1 Sometimes I feel like Jonah1 fleeing Nineveh. Who wants to hear what is evil? Every day we make this earth less alive, various or legal. What is this diminishment but sin against god which is a program to generate complexity? I should go to Nineveh and cry against wickedness which halts love which wants the other s different self to stay itself.2 They say if you re fair2 or moneyed or live on a mountain you won the lottery, everyone else, apologies    storms aren t going away so play the game nicely. Lots are cast, blame allotted, men tossed to the ocean s torsion, seaweed s cage, foreclosing depths and then the blue whale s curdled belly digesting everything we ve done.3 I visited a branch of Sea Life3 in an ex-county hall. Mops in corridors, half-empty vending machines. They took photos of us pretending to look scared in front of green screens. Rays took titbits from stinking cups. The sharks were gilled glide, ravenous for outside. We were vomited onto dry land by the Coca-Cola London Eye.4 I must warn Nineveh.4 But who wants to hear me say what is evil? It is dominion. It is the law that makes goodness impossible, fasting in sackcloth the only option. But god will not say must only relent or sorrow as the whale does when her calf is taken    a harrowed sound that does not bear description.

I learned to hide my wings almost immediately, learned to tuck and bandage them down. Long before the accident, before the glass shattering and that scene going dim, dimmer, and then dark, before the three fractures at the axis, three cracks   in the bone, it had already begun. My voice had begun to deepen, the sound of it suddenly more my father's than my own. My beard had started growing, my bones growing, my bones sore from the speed of their growth, and there,   at fourteen years of age, the first tugging of the muscles between my shoulder blades. It began as a tiny ache. It was just a minor irritation. Day after day passed, and this ache grew, and then the tips of the cartilaginous wings   began to tent my skin. Father Callahan had already warned that in each of us there was both potential for bad and good. When trying to shave for the first time, I nicked my cheek, the bleeding slow but continuous.   Standing there, dabbing at this small cut with tissue paper, the first tear surprised me, the left wing heaving through that fleshy mound of muscle between my shoulder blades and then the skin. I buckled and, on my knees, the right wing presented itself more rapidly than the left.   When I stood, there in the mirror, my wings outstretched with their tiny feathers wet, almost glutinous, a quick ribbon of blood snaking down my back. You wonder why I am such a master of avoidance, such a master of what is withheld. Is there any wonder, now?   I had no idea then they would wither and fall off in a few weeks. When Father Callahan patted my head in the sacristy and told me I was a good boy, a really good boy, an extraordinary boy, I wanted to be anything but extraordinary.  

On starless, windless nights like this I imagine I can hear the wedding dresses Weeping in their closets, Luminescent with hopeless longing, Like hollow angels. They know they will never be worn again. Who wants them now, After their one heroic day in the limelight? Yet they glow with desire In the darkness of closets. A few lucky wedding dresses Get worn by daughters just once more, Then back to the closet. Most turn yellow over time, Yellow from praying For the moths to come And carry them into the sky. Where is your mother's wedding dress, What closet? Where is your grandmother's wedding dress? What, gone? Eventually they all disappear, Who knows where. Imagine a dump with a wedding dress on it. I saw one wedding dress, hopeful at Goodwill. But what sad story brought it there, And what sad story will take it away? Somewhere a closet is waiting for it. The luckiest wedding dresses Are those of wives Betrayed by their husbands A week after the wedding. They are flung outside the double-wide, Or the condo in Telluride, And doused with gasoline. They ride the candolescent flames, Just smoke now, Into a sky full of congratulations.

The problems of a working girl Are more than meet the naked eye; And life becomes a dizzy whirl At times and dizzy, too, am I. I have not found the answer yet, And this is just a working plan: I shove along and do not fret, Nor yet depend on any man. To be a mother and a wife, I'm often urged by all my kith And kin but as for husbands, life Is easier without than with.

I m going to say what love signifies My grandfather said it was the desire of  the I for another I And since then I began to search for you My father said the number of  love was seven Because creation lasted seven days Seven days making love to its seven nights I looked for you in each seven that ciphered my life And I found you slipping away to other numbers One confuses oneself with one s other self When two bodies intertwine in bed, three loves have been in my life, four it will be when you have left five days that I cannot stand you, six kisses in La Paz Centro seven years of not finding you, love, show me from one to a thousand your nights What is your philosophy of love you ask me in bed: and I respond It s not a flower but maybe it is a number. Here, I gift it to you Hide it between your legs. At the count of two Make sure that it does not fall: One Open Sesame. Two Loves have stepped into your kingdom.    Translated from the SpanishTranslated from the SpanishTranslated from the SpanishTranslated from the Spanish

the truth flies     hungry, at least     and otherous, of which though it may be one Kafka said troublingly, it has many faces                                                                                                it s the faces one wants, tripping the light shadows of     its skin colours      of its wordy swiftness, angry and solvent, of its loud remarks                                        as of feeding flocks                      one year, one, among the smallest birds in the Northwest, flew into the house     a darting, panic thought     at the walls and grasses     perched on the top right corner of the frame   of Tom Field s painting wherein adulterous Genji is found out so Lady Murasaki reads from her blue scroll and permitted me to take it in my hand     soft, intricate   mind     honouring     and lift it out into the air and the next year, again, one flew into the house, almost certain, like a visitor, gold-crowned     winged   floating about     odd discoveries     and alighted on the brim of the lasagna dish     my hand trembled as I took it up and moved slowly to lift it out of the window     into   the air     a kind of thinking     like everybody else looking     for a continuing contravention of limits and a continuing contravention of limits and of substanceof substance    for Sharon Thesen for Sharon Thesenfor Sharon Thesen  

iithees wite skirtes / & orang                                
sweters     / i wont / inn the feedynge marte /
wile mye vegetable partes bloome /
inn the commen waye /   a grackel   
inn the guarden rooste /    the tall   
wymon wasching handes /                
or eyeing turnups   
/ the sadened powres wee rub /             so economicalie /inn 1 virsion off thynges /
alarum is mye nayme
                           / unkempt & handeld
i am hors /
i am sadeld /      i am a brokn horsiiiiiiiiii tonite i wuld luv to rite the mothe inn the guarden / 2  greev   it   /   &   as   a   mater   off  forme  /   did   u   kno  not a monthe goes bye  /  a tran i kno doesnt dye  /  just  shye   off   27   /   its   such   a   plesure   to   b   alive   /  inn  this  trembled  soot  /  u  lent  /  shock  is  a  struktured  responce  /  a  whord  lost  inn  the  mouthe  off keepers  /  &  u thum at the mothe  /  a dozen bes  / i  tetherred  thees  nites  /  i  gathred  so  manie  treees

Again the day begins, only no one wants its sanity or its blinding clarity. Daylight is not what we came all this way for. A pinch of salt, a drop of schnapps in our cup of tears, the ticket to the life to come, a short life of long nights & absent dawns & a little mercy in the tea.  

Disguised in my mouth as a swampland nailed to my teeth like a rising sun you come out in the middle of fish-scales you bleed into gourds wrapped with red ants you syncopate the air with lungs like screams from yazoo like X-rated tongues and nickel-plated fingers of a raw ghost man and somewhere stripped like a whirlwind stripped for the shrine room you sing to me through the side face of a black rooster In the morning  in the morning  in the morning all over my door like a rooster in the morning  in the morning  in the morning And studded in my kidneys like perforated hiccups inflamed in my ribs like three hoops of thunder through a screw a star-bent-bolt of quivering colons you breathe into veiled rays and scented ice holes you fire the space like a flare of embalmed pigeons and palpitate with the worms and venom and wailing flanks and somewhere inside this fever inside this patinaed pubic and camouflaged slit stooped forward on fangs in rear of your face you shake to me in the full crown of a black rooster In the morning  in the morning  in the morning Masquerading in my horn like a river eclipsed to infantries of dentures  of diving spears you enter broken mirrors through fragmented pipe spit you pull into a shadow ring of magic jelly you wear the sacrificial blood of nightfall you lift the ceiling with my tropical slush dance you slide and tremble with the reputation of an earthquake and when i kick through walls to shine like silver when i shine like brass through crust in a compound when i shine  shine  shine you wail to me in the drum call of a black rooster In the morning  in the morning  in the morning gonna kill me a rooster in the morning early in the morning way down in the morning before the sun passes by in the morning  in the morning  in the morning In the morning when the deep sea goes through a dog's bite and you spit on the tip of your long knife In the morning in the morning when peroxide falls on a bed of broken glass and the sun rises like a polyester ball of menses in the morning gonna firedance in the petro in the morning turn loose the blues in the funky jungle in the morning I said when you see the morning coming like a two-headed twister let it blow  let it blow in the morning  in the morning all swollen up like an ocean in the morning early in the morning before the cream dries in the bushes in the morning when you hear the rooster cry cry rooster cry in the morning  in the morning I said disguised in my mouth like a swampland nailed to my teeth like a rising sun you come out in the middle of fish-scales you bleed into gourds wrapped with red ants you syncopate the air with lungs like screams from yazoo like X-rated tongues and nickel-plated fingers of a raw ghost man and somewhere stripped like a whirlwind stripped for the shrine room you sing to me through the side face of a black rooster In the morning  in the morning  in the morning

Between 1985-1987, he writes sincerely, gratefully to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,  the International Red Cross Central Tracing Agency, Thai National Police, U.S. Department of State, and more, to no real end, though each letter surpasses the last. First he writes them in long hand, in Vietnamese, then I think someone helps revise, translate, and type: Don t say the boat was stopped or encircled,stoppedencircled say the boat was surrounded by the Thai pirates;surrounded it s true they took away with them eight girls in our boat,took away with them eight girls in our boat but abducted captures the situation better; say  abducted  The Reading Room will be closing in 15 minutes.  I sit and stare at the rust print left by a paperclip coiling into the dead end of a labyrinth.   I m reading the letters of Mr. Nguyen Van The concerning the disappearance of his granddaughter, Dinh Thuy Trang, when she escaped by boat  escaped by boat   In the blue of his sentences a boat leaves Vietnam, on October 24, 1985, ventures into the South China Sea, and drifts dangerously along the coast of Thailand.  I can just make out the boat, a small open  v , drawing its wake pattern, on the sea, in the letters.Around 9 A.M. of 26 October, the boat was surroundedAround 9 A.M. of 26 October, the boat was surroundedby 5 fishing boats belonging to the Thai fishermen.by 5 fishing boats belonging to the Thai fishermen. I recoil at the actions his apt verbs dramatize invaded, searched, ransacked, pried, looked, seized:invaded, searched, ransacked, pried, looked, seized I see teeth flashing inside mouths like knives. No trace of Thuy. She s gone   

It was hardly war, the hardliest of wars. Hardly, hardly. It occurred to me that this particular war was hardly war because of kids, more kids, those poor kids. The kids were hungry until we GIs fed them. We dusted them with DDT. Hardly done. Reha- bilitation of Korea, that is. It needs chemical fertilizer from the States, power to build things like a country. In the end it was the hardliest of wars made up of bubble gum, which GIs had to show those kids how to chew. In no circumstance whatever can man be comfortable without art. They don t want everlasting charity, and we are not giving it to them. We are just lending them a hand until they can stand on their own two feet. A novel idea. This is why it occurred to me that this particular war was hardly war, the hardliest of wars.     My father was hardly himself during the war, then I was born during the era that hardly existed, and, therefore, I hardly existed without DDT. Beauty is pleasure re- garded as the quality of a thing. I prefer a paper closet with real paper dresses in it. To be born hardly, hardly after the hardliest of wars, is a matter of debate. Still going forward. We are, that is. Napalm again. This is THE BIG PICTURE. War and its masses. War and its men. War and its machines. Together we form THE BIG PIC- TURE. From Korea to Germany, from Alaska to Puerto Rico. All over the world, the US Army is on the alert to defend our country, you the people, against aggression. This is THE BIG PICTURE, an official television report to the nation from the army. This is Korea! Is one thing better than another? These South Koreans are all right. Woe is you, woe is war, hardly war, woe is me, woe are you? My father is still alive, and this is how I came to prefer a paper closet with real paper dresses in it.     Well, it s morning in Korea. The most violently mountainous place on Earth. Every- one has been dusted, existence hardly done, whereas beauty has been regarded as the quality of a thing. At Uncle Dann s Huddle doughnuts and coffee are free and in case there are any, for there are many, the unescorted ladies are not permitted. The decision has been made in Tokyo for the hardliest of wars, an old soldier made it. The situation in Korea is so critical that we the Navy must give the Eighth Army prac- tical support. Do you remember how you began this day? How did you spend this morning? Woe are you? Well, pinecones fall every day. So why do we fail? Miles and miles of homeless refugees set adrift by the Red scourge. 

 
 A weeknight baseball game pledges its ticket holders a variety of extravagant processions and dalliances, and I am only one of its frequent enthusiasts spinning the turnstiles. Evenings here become lessons in piety, a refrain reduced to the simplest expression of worthier hungers. Troublesome, splendid concerns how to carry myself like and through the city, how to enclose myself within some private calm engage me at every level in the open-air stadium, and I ascend each level because I sit within the cheapest. Among the wind-whipped flags, I carry out a similar lashing upon myself with my mind s tongue, albeit with good humor since I have yet to arrive at a serious period of my life. But of all cities, this one understands bouts of seriousness, and whether someone in the clutches of such crisis decides to change his life, there will be no objection among the ticket holders. Litter swirls and sweeps itself past them. Wildly customized hats aslant on children s heads orbit the condiment table. A bearded boy stands haloed by the glowing hoard of cut spuds sitting beneath heat lamps. Like a cascade of song, endless beverages pour from trumpetlike spouts. I am still fair-skinned, perhaps a bit queer and dangerous, but childlike a bizarrely perfected image of masculinity and prowess delivering my sinewy frame through this. I have always been barked at by certain types go evolve.
go evolve.    for Jason Morris A wilderness contains no diamond. And because a diamond has been built for us, we must be distant from regions that threaten our civility. I speak about civility with a laugh, of course, but it s good-natured.  The universe falls apart and discloses a diamond,  according to the dictation transcribed by Jack Spicer, who was not quite Francis of Assisi, though both spent their lives in despair making toys to amuse the infant Christ. Whether the voice of dictation resembled that of our home team s radio announcer or the San Damiano cross  Francis, rebuild my church  is a matter of taste, such as taste in furniture. At any rate, Hunter Pence grounds into yet another double play, and we are stuck in our deference. A city could be built out from the baselines of a diamond. Far from the hospital near where I live and where Spicer died, the city s edge meets wilderness, and my reception crackles how s yours. I am trying to design my solace at a point shared by different stations, but the ballpark seagulls become a menace to my anxious antenna. Most nights they circle overhead until game s end when it is safe to ransack the leftover food, but in an inning distended past anyone s enjoyment a hangover s early arrival they settle upon the outfield. Their skepticism must be a sad sight for the rookie at bat, a spooky parody of messianic expectation. I mean we are smack-dab within a quiet, null moment of life (on earth) winding down to a supposed eternal hurrah deemed paradise. 

Count your fingers Count your toes Count your nose holes Count your blessings Count your stars (lucky or not) Count your loose change Count the cars at the crossing Count the miles to the state line Count the ticks you pulled off the dog Count your calluses Count your shells Count the points on the antlers Count the newjack's keys Count your cards; cut them again

     Coconut Milk, 2015 Coconut Milk, 2015Coconut Milk

Good gracious. You again. And it is always youYou again asking to borrow cigarettes and time. We are exhaling on the curb. Mouths heating with a debate. Yellow town lights bleed desperate wings against our faces. Testimonies of a good man tonight. The  Jesus Camp  story, stoicism and smoke smiles. My mother shot a man. TheMy mother shot a man ember pinches your fingertips with a desperate kiss. Does that make her a bad woman? We all die.Does that make her a bad woman? We all die. Does it matter? The extinguished filters are expensively buried. We woke with our names on gravestones today.

A downpour drumming on the rooftop, engine running, car, idle, interior bathed in the pungent intoxicating spices radiating from the carry-out in the passenger seat. Inside the Taj, neon beacon in a strip mall dark with the common sense of folks long gone home, red lamps glowered. A pair of headlights glared back. A downpour drowning out its own drumming, so loud I could barely make out the whispered venom streaming from a mobile into my right ear. She was saying something about something as I reached across the steering column with my left hand, as if my left ear had been bent by the loudspeaker of the law. Engine off, everything the car, the carry-out, etc.  went cold. I tossed the phone into the passenger seat, put her into reverse, backed up, out, and drove home with my double order, her running commentary as undertow.  

The sail is so vast when it's laid out on the driveway. I stake it with a screwdriver through the shackle at the tack to stretch it smooth, pulling on the head and clew. Now it's smooth as a night's worth of new snow. My wife, my partner, has been torn from her busy day. We face each other across the sail's foot and with my right hand and her left hand (I'm right handed, she's left handed) we pull an arm's length of the sail down over itself, then do this again, keeping my left hand, and her right hand, towards the foot. Each fold is easier since the sail grows narrower near the top. Then we fold towards each other and I wrap my arms around it, while she holds the bag's mouth open, the gray bag that will cover it through the winter. Then I thank her. And the driveway is visible again as it is in spring, when all the snow has melted.

While the Doormat asks neurotic questions about his ex, the Dream Girl looks at her watch if her man brings up the ex, and if the man ever says,  Everyone was in love with my ex,  a Dream Girl won t ask for a photo, but if a photo of the ex is provided, the Dream Girl won t demean the appearance of the ex because her man will likely rush to his ex s defense. The lesson is that when a man considers his ex a prize looks have little to do with it, for when a woman acts like a prize a man can forget he s with a battle axe. What should you say when he asks questions about your ex?your Remember you re a prize, so you needn t report that your ex stole appliances or defaulted on child support or that your ex has a Mafioso brother doing time for racketeering or that your ex is  still stalking you    because your man will not find these ex stories charming, if he s classy, so what you say about your ex is simply,  We wanted different things,  or, alternatively,  My ex and I went separate ways.  It s none of his business: your ex and all the vicissitudes of your past, like the jewelry your ex gave you which you pawned, or your violent fantasies about your ex because inquiring minds don t need to know. Did you know that exesdon t are a common conversation topic among men:  You remember my ex, the one who snapped ... ?  they might say, referring to the  terrible  ex who was  possessed by demons,  thus causing the inevitable ex- tramarital affair? Of course he never had anything to do with his ex snever transformation, he was a perfect angel, but lo and behold, the ex- orcist was suddenly required! Women believe these narratives and ex- coriate themselves if they re Doormats, but love is beset by variables, and Dream Girls must take control in this world of unknowns.

You flinch. Something flickers, not fleeing your face. My Heart hammers at the ceiling, telling my tongue To turn it down. Too late. The something climbs, leaps, is Falling now across us like the prank of an icy, brainy Lord. I chose the wrong word. I am wrong for not choosing Merely to smile, to pull you toward me and away from What you think of as that other me, who wanders lost among ...     Among whom? The many? The rare? I wish you didn t care. I watch you watching her. Her very shadow is a rage That trashes the rooms of your eyes. Do you claim surprise At what she wants, the poor girl, pelted with despair, Who flits from grief to grief? Isn t it you she seeks? And If you blame her, know that she blames you for choosing Not her, but me. Love is never fair. But do we   should we   care?  

Lucky day still spent wrestling the private problems and obsessions encountered first in your youth but played out now within the spectacle of public aging (tho, strangely, as you age you feel less & less seen by the young, a citizen active in frequencies of light waves increasingly invisible not even boring to 15-year-olds).boring  Of course, some problems you once had really have vanished you can sense that as your daughter lays out the tactics crucial to "pre-gaming," her teen friends setting out to get toasted or stoned before house parties, parties at which they've been warned not to drug or drink  no longer a worry for you (except as relates, of course, to your daughter) you can drink & drug somewhat "it would seem" to your heart's content. Not your style, you say? Not any longer? Still, the urge to lift or get lifted from self-conscious woes hasn't gone away totally, has it? Wanting to be free of your self has always been a mission big in your church evangelically so! You got in a way (the wrong way) your wish  your skin certainly got looser on you baggy, rounder, wrinkled prescriptions for departure the rigging's untuned, & no milk bath full of rose hips can compensate (so your friend likes to say), no fish oil omega-3 in gel capsules manufactured by entrepreneurial ex-hippies no wifely fruit smoothies or mod boots will cure jowls now or allow for glamour without the costume.

When Mrs. McCausland comes to mind she slips through a small gap in oblivion and walks down her front steps, in her hand a small red velvet pillow she tucks under the head of Old Jim Schreiber, who is lying dead-drunk against the curb of busy Market Street. Then she turns, labors up the steps and is gone . . . A small story. Or rather, the memory of a story I heard as a boy. The witnesses are not to be found, the steps lead nowhere, the pillow has collapsed into a thread of dust . . . Do the dead come back only to remind us they, too, were once among the living, and that the story we make of our lives is a mystery of luminous, but uncertain moments, a shuffle of images we carry toward sleep  Mrs. McCausland with her velvet pillow, Old Jim at peace a story, like a small clearing in the woods at night, seen from the windows of a passing train.

I want to believe we can t see anything we don t have a word for.   When I look out the window and say green, I mean sea green, I mean moss green, I mean gray, I mean pale and also electrically flecked with white and I mean green in its damp way of glowing off a leaf.   Scheele s green, the green of Renaissance painters, is a sodium carbonate solution heated to ninety degrees as arsenious oxide is stirred in. Sodium displaces copper, resulting in a green precipitate that is sometimes used as insecticide. When I say green I mean a shiny green bug eating a yellow leaf.   Before synthetics, not every painter could afford a swathe of blue. Shocking pink, aka neon, aka kinky pink, wasn t even on the market. I want to believe Andy Warhol invented it in 1967 and ever since no one s eyes have been the same. There were sunsets before, but without that hot shocking neon Marilyn, a desert sky was just cataract smears. I want to believe this.   The pale green of lichen and half-finished leaves filling my window is a palette very far from carnation or bougainvillea, but to look out is to understand it is not, is to understand what it is not. I stare out the window a lot. Between the beginning and the end the leaves unfolded. I looked out one morning and everything was unfamiliar as if I was looking at the green you could only see if you d never known synthetic colors existed.   I ve drawn into myself people say. We understand, they say.   There are people who only have words for red and black and white, and I wonder if they even see the trees at the edge of the grass or the green storms coming out of the west. There are people who use the same word for green and red and brown, and I wonder if red seems so urgently bright pouring from the body when there is no green for it to fall against.   In his treatise on color Wittgenstein asked,  Can t we imagine certain people having a different geometry of colour than we do?    I want to believe the eye doesn t see green until it has a name, because I don t want anything to look the way it did before.   Van Gogh painted pink flowers, but the pink faded and curators labeled the work  White Roses  by mistake.   The world in my window is a color the Greeks called chlorol.chlorol. When I learned the word I was newly pregnant and the first pale lichens had just speckled the silver branches. The pines and the lichens in the chill drizzle were glowing green and a book in my lap said chlorol was one of the untranslatable words. The vibrating glow pleased me then, as a finger dipped in sugar pleased me then. I said the word aloud for the baby to hear. Chlorol. I imagined the baby could only see hot pink and crimson inside its tiny universe, but if you can see what I m seeing, the word for it is chlorol. It s one of the things you ll like out here.   Nineteenth century critics mocked painters who cast shadows in unexpected colors. After noticing green cypresses do drop red shadows, Goethe chastised them.  The eye demands completeness and seeks to eke out the colorific circle in itself.  He tells of a trick of light that had him pacing a row of poppies to see the flaming petals again and figure out why.   Over and over again Wittgenstein frets the problem of translucence. Why is there no clear white? He wants to see the world through white-tinted glasses, but all he finds is mist.   At first I felt as if the baby had fallen away like a blue shadow on the snow.   Then I felt like I killed the baby in the way you can be thinking about something else and drop a heavy platter by mistake.   Sometimes I feel like I was stupid to have thought I was pregnant at all.   Color is an illusion, a response to the vibrating universe of electrons. Light strikes a leaf and there s an explosion where it lands. When colors change, electromagnetic fields are colliding. The wind is not the only thing moving the trees.   Once when I went into those woods I saw a single hot pink orchid on the hillside and I had to keep reminding myself not to tell the baby about the beautiful small things I was seeing. So, hot pink has been here forever and I don t even care about that color or how Andy Warhol showed me an orchid. I hate pink. It makes my eyes burn.

So lightly and invisibly I hardly knew it, river of blood descending without joy back to the heart through the frail vein all the time  the largest of the body!  shredded then dissolved ("obliterated") and there was a sudden seepage into surrounding tissue instead of the blood pouring out as you'd expect forever, and a new vein formed to bypass what was gone like a wild meander even the smallest flood ends, and the river goes straight from that point. But in my case the thin-walled base-ends held forming an anabranch, a section of a river that diverts from the main channel, rejoins it downstream. Local ones can be caused by or make small islands in the watercourse but sometimes they flow hundreds of miles like the Bahr el Zeraf in the south Sudan that splits from the Bahr al Jabal of the White Nile, doesn't return until Malakal instead of leaving behind, as it could have with the blood being old, a full-fledged oxbow lake that before too long will blister in the sun, become a little blue scar beside the heart.  

Summer brings out the girls in their green dresses Whom the foolish might compare to daffodils, Not seeing how a dead grandmother in each one governs her limbs, Darkening the bright corolla, using her lips to speak through, Or that a silver torque was woven out of The roots of wet speargrass.                               The young are mastered by the Dead, Lacking cunning. But on the beaches, under the clean wind That blows this way from the mountains of Peru, Drunk with the wind and the silence, not moving an inch As the surf-swimmers mount on yoked waves, One can begin to shake with laughter, Becoming oneself a metal Neptune.                                                                  To want nothing is The only possible freedom. But I prefer to think of An afternoon spent drinking rum and cloves In a little bar, just after the rain had started, in another time Before we began to die   the taste of boredom on the tongue Easily dissolving, and the lights coming on   With what company? I forget.                                                        Where can we find the right Herbs, drinks, bandages to cover These lifelong intolerable wounds? Herbs of oblivion, they lost their power to help us The day that Aphrodite touched her mouth to ours.  

It s the shivering. When rage grows hot as an army of red ants and forces the mind to quiet the body, the quakes emerge, sometimes just the knees, but, at worst, through the hips, chest, neck until, like a virus, slipping inside the lungs and pulse, every ounce of strength tapped to squeeze words from my taut lips, his eyes scanning my car s insides, my eyes, my license, and as I answer the questions 3, 4, 5 times, my jaw tight as a vice, his hand massaging the gun butt, I imagine things I don t want to and inside beg this to end before the shiver catches my hands, and he sees, and something happens.   

Saturday mornings, before
my weekly chores,
I used to sneak out of the house
and across the street,
grabbing the first grasshopper
walking in the damp California grass
along the stream.
Carefully hiding a silver hook
beneath its green wings,
I'd float it out
across the gentle ripples
towards the end of its life.
Just like that.
I'd give it the hook
and let it ride.
All I ever expected for it
was that big-mouth bass
awaiting its arrival.
I didn't think
that I was giving up one life
to get another,
that even childhood
was full of sacrifice.
I'd just take the bright green thing,
pluck it off its only stalk,
and give it away as if
it were mine to give.
I knew someone out there
would be fooled,
that someone would accept
the precious gift.
So I just sent it along
with a plea of a prayer,
hoping it would spread its wings this time
and fly across that wet glass sky,
no concern for what inspired
its life, or mine,
only instinct guiding pain
towards the other side.
 

Spindrift, crustacean patience and a gust of ozone, you come back once more to this dazzling shore, its warm uterine rinse, heart-racing heave and groan.   A quick gasp as you slip into the hissing wash, star cluster, dulse and kelp, slick algae, spittle, froth, the intimate slash and dash, hard-packed in the seething broth.   Soft water-lip, soft hand, close tug of origin, the sensual writhe and snore of maidenhair and frond, you swim here once more smart as a rogue gene.   Spirits of lake, river and woodland pond preside mildly in water never troubled by wind or tide; and the quiet suburban pool is only for the fearful     no wind-wave energies where no sea briar grips and no freak breaker with the violence of the ages comes foaming at the mouth to drown you in its depths.   Among pebbles a white conch worn by the suck and crunch, a sandy skull as old as the centuries, in cold and solitude reclines where the moon-magnet shines;   but today you swirl and spin in sea water as if, creatures of salt and slime and naked under the sun, life were a waking dream and this the only life.  

It's best to wake early, four, five a.m., while the neighbors sleep and the moon floats like a pearl in a pool of ink. In half-light the empty house is less familiar, less sad the walls with their nail holes, the carpet its patterns of wear, curtains with no job to do. I sit on my suitcase, eat powdered donuts; a napkin for a plate, juice out of a paper cup. Make one last check of the cupboards, the drawers. Run my hand along the countertops, the stair rail, trace the walls with my fingertips, each scar proof of my childhood, my initials carved into the tree of this, our sixth house.   My family could write a Handbook for Leaving Handbook for Leaving the way we pack up during summer solstice, disconnect from people and places like an abrupt shutting off of electricity. My father's convinced himself that the unknown is always better, the way the retina sees images upside down and the brain corrects.                                                                              Here I smoked candy cigarettes, my breath in winter passing for smoke, pale green of my bedroom. I counted the number of intersections on the way to school (four). I bundle memories together, weight them with stones like unwanted kittens drowned in a creek.   What kind of animal constantly moves? The point of migration is the return. We're nomads without the base knowledge of where to find water. These moves are like arranged marriages; economics now, love later. Maybe it's not against nature to move. Most of the body is no more than ten years old and blood renews itself every 90 days. But leaving disturbs the fabric of a place. I'd rather stay and witness change. My mother always wanting to plant perennials that we never stay to see. I pour some water on the marigolds clattering around the mailbox, Aztec flowers of death, their strong scent a beacon to lost souls. Then we drive away, the blank windows like the blank eyes of the dead, waiting for someone to seal the past with a penny.  

April fool Bear's-foot Bog-onion Devil's-apple Dog parsley Doll's-eyes Fairy hells Flying saucers Four o'clock Gagweed Goosefoot Hare's-ear Indian beans Inkweed Jacob's-coat Lady's-thumb Lion's-beard Locoweed Monkey-fiddle Moonseed Mother-in-law Puncture-vine Naked lady Quaker-bonnets Rabbit-bush Smartweed Sneezeweed Snakegrass Stinking Willie Sundials Swallow-wort Wahoo Wart-cress Witches' thimbles Wolfsbane Wonder berry

Danger from others provoked a change in my internal law. I was no flawed creature, but the unpersuaded sure made their case with their brutality. They tied me to a fence, began thrashing the life out of me. If the meek deserve to jubilee, in what bodies are we to defend our selves and supple registers of bonum. It s time to confess I was never cruising for this bruising but maybe just cruising toward a rapid intercession of effervescent affection that could gift a beneficent fever among us.                              Angels arrived to inhospitality,                          and I hear my body still groan in that aftermath.        I am my desire. Grew up a screw-upam  but bucked up a fuck-up, each thing I took into my nine holes was rotting, obviously. What perils when asleep, when en route, in the sea, in the wildernesssomehow I made it through.somehow I made it through. When beside myself, I spotted an antidote toward a reversal in all places my biology doomed me. True witness was clarified by my thighs, chest, and throat. To quote that it s flesh and it s not  Now from my 1394 Utah Street room, a couple of blocks away, a strangers  elegy sinks toward Earth. To keep watch of community beyond a shame that stills me  We ve been put outside the populace to offset their enmity.       Singing on my way back to Assisi a sissy, I m thrown into a ditch.a sissy It s my bitch of a knee failing me failing me after so much cycling that groansafter so much cycling as though flesh has worthy feeling. These thieves think I m a rich troubadour, despite my nasal whine and valedictory hymn  the one about poverty, or maybe I am that bad of a mumbler? Since I m not much of a stumbler, it s a whim to be made inert through violence cops not long agocops not long agowould round up the likes of mewould round up the likes of mealong Market Street so thanks, men,along Market Street for making this human a humble and stilled thing, alive only unto your forces. Earth will be a swallower of your corpses.       Made of dirt, would I know what dirt tastes like. While I was cycling, the earth and I exceeded living bodies  partitions. Wishing that the strewn parts of you long gone ones would reassemble in a gust of florescence and soundtracks, I promise my legs can brace for any supple clamor. If the dead all rise age thirty, at twenty-nine, still ahead is my finest glamour. Thus I became a hammer to darkest anti-matter. Thus I became a ticking time bomb of kingdom expectation in my gray hoodie and sharp teeth.                                                 for Bruce Boonefor Bruce Boone       Bring forth any within you to save you. So made changeless, a wave or nerve to enact its fullness. If I m raised over waste, hold me there to vomit the meat I ve sucked down and peril I ve soaked in through local commotion. There is a continentSan FranciscoSan Francisco at the bottom of the Pacific Ocean.   What is it to be equipping for the convenience of kingdom       such as swapping spit with strangers, giving dogs a good scratch behind the ears, or fighting from my bicycle the cars that could spell my death in the papers. And drinking milkshakes in Mission diners. A cop knelt and kissed the feet of a priest, and I threw up at the sight of that.                            My only security has been to garden civility                          in city boots scuffled along the way                          by impedimenta to my solace.  

And when her son never returned from the meant-to-crush-him camps,   the crucible of Poland, always-hard-at-work Isa slept   for endless hours, and once, under her lids, she was led,   by diligent female Virgils, to a vast meadow   where an inspirited Isa embraced, one by one,   countless women who remained in mourning for their cherished sons.   Gallant and stricken, together the myriad bereaved   but defiant women formed an ever-widening circle,   prodigal with bitter tears, and then, suddenly,   like a jackdaw darting from eave to sun-drenched eave,   something flew between the throats of the grieving,   heart-gutted mothers, and a great beauty arose:   In the dream, Isa recalled, the singing of the harrowed women   with war-taken sons hushed the world's barrenness.   In the dream, the startling river of sound altered the embattled earth.  

The huge scar-pocked palm leaf outside the papeterie in Papeete. The bikini billboard at the bus station of a busy mining town in Bohemia. That moment s hesitation in the photo studio: how did I come to appear in this light? The philologist s pink index card, his commentary on a line from the Iliad.Iliad Letters that the lazy postman left behind in a sack labeled  Destination: The Azores.  Now it s turned out different after all, so different from what we imagined in our evening courses. No idea who it is will one day give the speech to summon up an army of heroes. Fighting machines were the latest hit when our children s children still went to the movies. What now? How should I pass my days, with the world exposition long since over? Discovered by divers, far from the coast, a yellow pianola at the bottom of the sea. The calm of images thick with dreams in the banana republic of the real.    Translated from the GermanTranslated from the GermanTranslated from the GermanTranslated from the German

Snow White was nude at her wedding, she s so white the gown seemed to disappear when she put it on.   Put me beside her and the proximity is good for a study of chiaroscuro, not much else.   Her name aggravates me most, as if I need to be told what s white and what isn t.   Judging strictly by appearance there s a future for me forever at her heels, a shadow s constant worship.   Is it fair for me to live that way, unable to get off the ground?   Turning the tables isn t fair unless they keep turning. Then there s the danger of Russian roulette   and my disadvantage: nothing falls from the sky to name me.   I am the empty space where the tooth was, that my tongue rushes to fill because I can t stand vacancies.   And it s not enough. The penis just fills another gap. And it s not enough.   When you look at me, know that more than white is missing.  

Hour in which I consider hydrangea, a salt or sand plant, varietal, the question of varietals, the diet of every mother I know, 5 pounds feels like 20, I have lost   I have lost, yes, a sense of my own possible beauty, grown external, I externalize beauty. Beauty occurs on the surface of plants; the sun darkens the skin of my child, he is so small, he is beautiful (I can see; it is obvious) and everything about him is beautiful. His hand swells from the bite [spread?] of some insect[ s] venom because he is small. He appears to feel nothing. He smashes his skull against the floor. He screams. I hold him in my lap on the kitchen floor in front of an open freezer, pressing a pack of frozen clay against his forehead. He likes the cold. I see; it is so obvious. Hydrangea. When I move, when I walk pushing my child s stroller (it is both walking and pushing or hauling, sometimes, also, lifting; it is having another body, an adjunct body composed of errand and weight and tenderness and no small amount of power), I imagine I can feel this small amount of weight, this 5 pounds like 20, interfering with the twitch of every muscle in my body. As an object, a mother is confusing, a middle-aged mother with little spare flesh, I feel every inch of major muscle pulling against gravity and against the weight of my child, now sleeping. This is the hour for thinking hydrangea. Let no man look at me. I stop to brush the drowsy child s little eye. His face. He barely considers his mother. I am all around him. Why should he consider what is all around him? Perhaps what is missing is a subtle power of differentiation. I am in, therefore, a time of mass apprehensions.

Happens this time in answer to indecency Lit by the yellow shop windows cast Unkind to you, that light You say, Sit, Ubu, sit, or Hey, I like your weave This avenue for instance Gateway to escapade You can see from the beginning to its end All-embracing greed Distracting appliqu s of altruism Small pomme de terre Can you tell whose hand on the basinet and that does what for you Warmth all in the light Sight all in garage park hallway Morning's dusk on pause You stand body in profile What you don't fill in the doorway stays empty More than overcome I know you're there and unseal my lips  

My first teacher told me                that what sculpture involved was being a God. He was not talking   about the old ways, about fashioning                a man out of a rib. Out of the earth. A god can see something   that does not exist yet in the world. Who                could have imagined the giraffe, the octopus, the flounder? Who   could have imagined our sharp sensibilities,                our contortions? The materials are all there eyes and blood and respiration,   but still, they get made new. Now I know                that these days such a view is against science, but the idea of a god is as real   as god is not. A scientist who sees                what has been done versus one who can make straw out of gold.   Or more like plastic out of petroleum.                Paper out of trees. You have to decide which kind you will be.   We re mistaken when we equate the wise                and the prophetic. You re always looking either backwards or forwards.   This piece puts you on a precipice.                It s up to you which way you fall. You see it s all there.   The scientist and the artist were once one                 how else could you record what you saw? How else, find a way of seeing?  

There s a spirit in me that admits no weakness. Is it the best of me or worst? Cow daisies burn their stars into the stalled air of pastures. No one else cares whether they ll last. I shirk the sick and go out to pick flowers, Bushels of the tough and prickly-legged, Whichever I can pull out of the gulch, And push them into thunder-pitchers. An invalid in a peignoir pulls the covers over her head In the high cherry bed great-grandmother had made To match the chest of drawers. Solitudes gather under the Beau D arc. I ache for the meanness, the glorious meanness That knocked croquet balls into its soft meal trunk, To hear the thwack of that mallet, To be it, as it cleanly cracks and lets the other ball be gone. Acquisitive gall made my people call themselves victorious. They thought they won the Mexican War, among others. One ancestor drove his bayonet into the dirt when he returned    This tree is what took root and bloomed, Though Beau D arcs grow complex in illness. The locusts have chewed its thatch into fretwork, Its leaves fluted crisp, poxed yellowish, kissed by the worm. Huptemugs believed that train rides to the capital to hear Charlemagne singing Franz would cure the soul (As venison is cured) against life s turmoil    They could not tolerate complaints of the feet, Corns and hammertoes, evidence of rot. If generous you might have called us committed to transcendence, Though who that ever fought her way into an opera box Ever let the arias consign her to a fate of constant care? There is a spirit in me that admits no weakness. When it sings, the rest of me despairs.

I lay down under language it left me and I slept  You, the Comforter, came into the room my blood, my mouth all buttoned away  Makers of houses, books, clothes- makers, goodbye 

The camera is having trouble focusing. A blurry spot where the universe is. Outside, a storm is brewing, trashcans into windshields. Outside agitators, a nebula of thick dust. The images are black and white but you can imagine the green of this star's birth as its extra spirals out. This spring a cosmic mirage where you could watch, on every television, the death of a star in a supernova explosion nine billion years ago across the cosmos. Here in Sandtown, six men have broken the spine of another. It was a mistake to send the camera out so quickly. Easy to fix the lens but nearly impossible to reach it, as far out from us as it has drifted already.  

and it was political. I made coffee and the coffee was political. I took a shower and the water was. I walked down the street in short shorts and a Bob Mizer tank top and they were political, the walking and the shorts and the beefcake silkscreen of the man posing in a G-string. I forgot my sunglasses and later, on the train, that was political, when I studied every handsome man in the car. Who I thought was handsome was political. I went to work at the university and everything was very obviously political, the department and the institution. All the cigarettes I smoked between classes were political, where I threw them when I was through. I was blond and it was political. So was the difference between  blond  and  blonde.  I had long hair and it was political. I shaved my head and it was. That I didn t know how to grieve when another person was killed in America was political, and it was political when America killed another person, who they were and what color and gender and who I am in relation. I couldn t think about it for too long without feeling a helplessness like childhood. I was a child and it was political, being a boy who was bad at it. I couldn t catch and so the ball became political. My mother read to me almost every night and the conditions that enabled her to do so were political. That my father s money was new was political, that it was proving something. Someone called me faggot and it was political. I called myself a faggot and it was political. How difficult my life felt relative to how difficult it was was political. I thought I could become a writer and it was political that I could imagine it. I thought I was not a political poet and still my imagination was political. It had been, this whole time I was asleep.

They look Like Big Strong hands Don t they? But for some They are eerily reminiscent Of drunken stepfathers who didn t listen Abusive lovers Who didn t ask permission Of bullies Who never got to see the gold within  Cause they were too busyfracking the aether out of Innocentsfracking These Bronze Hands Give people flashbacks of Brass Knuckles Tall, dark, and sinister Skip across their eyelids Wary of their trinkets These hands Look like they would snatch their children out of the night Fright In the eyes of a stranger Is hard to chisel away So I choose to dispel the myths and preconceived notions Not all giants from the ocean are created violent Some of us Dream of violin solos While fumbling with a lack of nimble Sometimes These Big, Strong hands Are too small to cradle all these broken dreams I hold them too close, I suppose The pitter-patter of shattered hopes on tattered heart-strings Are a practiced tune These fingers sing Sometimes They make me a target So many Napol ons Want their volley to knock the nose off the sphinx So I meandered to the metamorphosis of these metacarpals into mandible munchers and it made me malignant They look Like big ol  meat mashers don t they These boulders Used to reduce mountains into molehills But though they Once Were WarriorsOnce Were Warriors These old soldiers gather moss now They ve seen enough violence for two lifetimes and have since retired They beg forgiveness For sinning against their brothers And taking up arms against them Nobody ever asks me what I see  Cause to me They look like blame the big kid For defending himself against the antagonistic little shit with the chip on his shoulder They look like These big digits won t fit fingertip thimble kisses They look like high-roller scapegoats And tactile regret I know What they look like But they are Grandpa s fissures filled with pride in combing my hair They re Grandma s amethyst veins helping me cross cracked pavement They re dad s throwing discus My Uncle s shooting hoops My brothers playing music Regardless of what they look like My hands are Large And Powerful From a long line of love With no time for the presumptionsOf Mice and MenOf Mice and Men My hands Were trained by Earth mothers Who let   lelo Hawai i roll thunder  cross the valleys and echo from the Cliffs My granite palms Are diamonds in the rough Smooth enough to wipe away little streams from Northern Springs And put pressure on cuts To stop rivulets from leaking My hands Massage Caress Intertwine And Heal Move nimbly with knot work They tremble and quake They help me stand up straight My hands can stand the heat So that even while it s still molten They will help shape The golden heart Within the next Mountain

Cinder blocks ripple. A hard lot is suddenly glammed up by an illusion. Cats will slip under chain-link and lap this dirty pool. I want to go there, be gone there, be anything liquid or even topped with barbed tape. But the sky is swept away and I am stuck in a parked car, all limbs attached to the idea of being human. As if sketched by da Vinci. As if stretched across a piece of parchment, I am drawn. Fear circles flesh boxed in by so many tawdry corners: disease, grocery lists, and suchnot. Even my thighs face Vitruvian quandaries: whether to stay together or fall apart. The mental ward is not unappealing: I check my calendar. What s a lesion in the temporal lobe except an opportunity for time to fall into a black hole? These are clinical terms,time and black hole, words even this century s doctorstimeblack hole will recognize as problematic: both should help me forget but don t. Heal, deaden. Either way I am a woman who wants to be rid of memory, past and future. Today I desire nothing more than to sit stilled. What s so rotten about this willing suspension of all inclinations to engage anything other than stasis, brow furrowed, body puddled, hollow? Earlier, I watched a shiny black millipede on turned dirt make progress that could be measured in inches. Perhaps the art of letters is as insubstantial, as oddly disconcerting, and as unwavering. Nothing can be mistaken for resolution, yet the allure of metamorphosis, the way hard things buckle under the line, ameliorates something, at least encourages the generalized slurry of bad thinking to flow into the next available trough. Slop has purpose. This much I know.

I took my boy to hear an echo. He wanted to hear one. I wanted him to.   We wended through a half-formed unintelligible brushy wood to a place I knew called  cave.    It had openings at both ends and could be seen through, not into.   Nor was it a tunnel, strictly, though it passed through the ground, though it went somewhere.   It was like stepping into a telescope unseen, into the dark distorted center.   The walls were arched and laid with glazed tiles, orange, aqua, muddy green and so   streaked with nervous lines where water had run down, where water must have trellised down still.   It was not clean. It smelled of piss. Chicken bones, empties, old rubbers, mold.   Echo, I called. So did my boy. But his voice was small birdscratch it   got all lost inside the echo my voice made; pale echo, barely one.    That was when I had a boy.   I m quite sure I did.  I wanted one, back then, when I had something to offer, when I wasn t in this place, where light passes through me,  when I wasn t like this, which is what, when I wanted one, as he, poor boy, wanted me.

No matter the pull toward brink. No matter the florid, deep sleep awaits. There is a time for everything. Look, just this morning a vulture nodded his red, grizzled head at me, and I looked at him, admiring the sickle of his beak. Then the wind kicked up, and, after arranging that good suit of feathers he up and took off. Just like that. And to boot, there are, on this planet alone, something like two million naturally occurring sweet things, some with names so generous as to kick the steel from my knees: agave, persimmon, stick ball, the purple okra I bought for two bucks at the market. Think of that. The long night, the skeleton in the mirror, the man behind me on the bus taking notes, yeah, yeah. But look; my niece is running through a field calling my name. My neighbor sings like an angel and at the end of my block is a basketball court. I remember. My color's green. I'm spring.           for Walter Aikens          for Walter Aikens for Walter Aikens

 Bottle gatherer, what do you hope to gain from this gathering of the discards of other people s merrymaking, beyond the few cents you ll accrue? 
 I will enjoy the echo of their celebrating. And besides, the giant snake-head of the bottle bank is at least a block away. I am helping them. 
 And does that offer you a pleasure in these days of random mass shootings in bars and music venues? 
 Any bottle that has drops of wine in it and no drops of blood pleases me. 
 Do you believe in God, my friend? 
 I am not your friend, good Sir, although I wish you well. And I ll need at least a year to answer your question. 
 Fine then, tell me, do you differentiate between green, brown, and colorless bottles? 
 No more than the skin colors or hair colors of our citizens. 
 Can I help you, for no recompense, to bring the bottles to the big metal snake?
 Ah, kind sir, I thank you, but some journeys are better taken alone."

There's a word you've met but once and now forgotten                for the spoon-shaped concave under your Adam's apple: a small pouch that must be kissed and kissed again                by lovers learning the ins and outs of one another and where last night in the sleeping dark a lone mosquito                inserted itself and drew fresh blood and left venom and a couple of love-bites                then left without waking you although this morning you'll blaze with the minute but unassuageable                pain of them which only that word that's vanished into the mud of memory might be the right cooling balm for.

Surely you paused at this roadside oasis In your nomadic youth, and saw the mound Of never-used cement, the curious faces, The soft-drink ads and the uneven ground Rainbowed with oily puddles, where a snail Had scrawled its slimy, phosphorescent trail.   Like a frontier store-front in an old western It might have nothing behind it but thin air, Building materials, fruit boxes, scrap iron, Dust-laden shrubs and coils of rusty wire, A cabbage-white fluttering in the sodden Silence of an untended kitchen garden     Nirvana! But the cracked panes reveal a dark Interior echoing with the cries of children. Here in this quiet corner of Co. Cork A family ate, slept, and watched the rain Dance clean and cobalt the exhausted grit So that the mind shrank from the glare of it.   Where did they go? South Boston? Cricklewood? Somebody somewhere thinks of this as home, Remembering the old pumps where they stood, Antique now, squirting juice into a cream Lagonda or a dung-caked tractor while A cloud swam on a cloud-reflecting tile.   Surely a whitewashed sun-trap at the back Gave way to hens, wild thyme, and the first few Shadowy yards of an overgrown cart track, Tyres in the branches such as Noah knew   Beyond, a swoop of mountain where you heard, Disconsolate in the haze, a single blackbird.   Left to itself, the functional will cast A death-bed glow of picturesque abandon. The intact antiquities of the recent past, Dropped from the retail catalogues, return To the materials that gave rise to them And shine with a late sacramental gleam.   A god who spent the night here once rewarded Natural courtesy with eternal life   Changing to petrol pumps, that they be spared For ever there, an old man and his wife. The virgin who escaped his dark design Sanctions the townland from her prickly shrine.   We might be anywhere but are in one place only, One of the milestones of earth-residence Unique in each particular, the thinly Peopled hinterland serenely tense   Not in the hope of a resplendent future But with a sure sense of its intrinsic nature.  

These unshaped islands, on the sawyer s bench, Wait for the chisel of the mind, Green canyons to the south, immense and passive, Penetrated rarely, seeded only By the deer-culler s shot, or else in the north Tribes of the shark and the octopus, Mangroves, black hair on a boxer s hand.   The founding fathers with their guns and bibles, Botanist, whaler, added bones and names To the land, to us a bridle As if the id were a horse: the swampy towns Like dreamers that struggle to wake,   Longing for the poets  truth And the lover s pride. Something new and old Explores its own pain, hearing The rain s choir on curtains of grey moss Or fingers of the Tasman pressing On breasts of hardening sand, as actors Find their own solitude in mirrors,   As one who has buried his dead, Able at last to give with an open hand.  

Wherein she martyrs the mirror:                  this carnival of stone,                                    her lips dilate                                    the negation space into starpoint                     Wherein she, to be both sacrum & wrist                   neither the fugitive epidermis,                                    nor the unlocked ashblack                                     sovereigns the shadow swell as love                     Wherein she ardors the emptiness open,                  proof the unanchored                                     Spirit of my silence,                  her revisions clothing my brightest orgasm                      Wherein she says, I can hear you,                  the seed under the belly s flesh love the far shore,                                      she says, For She withdraws the Spring wildShe                                     Thrust in her mother s surrender,                   iron ocean blackened to aurora.  

Lit with strange carpentry magic    they build time-shares in her head. They carve names deep in wood, erect beams of metal to hold up the invincible defense of a bad history. They mourn what s subjective. They are shutters closed. Sometimes I imagine such men in flip-flops with fat towels draped over confident shoulders. I imagine they all live in Texas, and find South Padre too hot, and then I imagine them blaming diversity for everything. Here, in the middle of grief, we pout to the rhythm of their sentences. Suns hiss in their dreams. Soon such critics will meet daily for prayers. The Pharisees identify the guilty woman. They are gathering sticks for a witch burning. Curandera lit with the fire of sighs, casts spells, burns sage, sweats in a lodge, her own prayers flaming.

Little soul, you and I will become the memory of a memory of a memory. A horse released of the traces forgets the weight of the wagon.

Our Box Henry hid    away. John Berryman s Ol  Henry sulked. I see his point he was trying to put one over. It was that he thought that we thought he could do it that breaks our Henry out this-a-way.could  So, here he will come out and talk.   All the world like a fool-bent lover once did see from Ol  Henry s side. Here comes a departure: hereafter, something falls out. Now, it might go fraught. Let us see how Box Henry, pried open for all to see, survives.   What he has now to say is a long wonder the world can bear and see. Once, with his black-face worn, John was glad all at the top. And he sang. Here, in this land where some strong be, let Box Henry grow in every head.                            From Dream Song 1

My eyes are polished smooth by sight, they clot like crystals in storm glass, like my sister brewing beakers of toxin. If we had seen what had been done, what the helicopter pilot did in our name,   what the special ops team did in our name, what they did with their hands in our name. What if it were my sister, what if it were her, what? If we had seen with our own smooth eyes.   Mark the diacritical, my lovely: we re all wearing our knee-high boots, every last one of us, we live in a booted nation. A nation girded and gunning. This moment, this is precisely all, watching takes work, sight takes hours,   takes my eyeglasses, every last one of them, as if they were yours. You can see there s a sigh in our sight. What if it were my sister? What if it were, what. What we saw ground into our eyes with the photos,   with the newspaper reports. What would I say, what can I say if, what would I say if it were my sister, my own? With my own beakers of toxin, my own boots, my own hands in my own name?

The first act of love in a new house is not private. Loving each other we are half-aware of door and mirror. Our ecstasy includes the bedside chair, the air from the landing. Street-lamp and elm utter leaves on walls as in no room ever. Theirs is the tongue our tongues join in translating. Their message is clear: tonight you cannot ignore the world at the window. So we love in the knowledge of a city at a different angle. And sharing our bed with furniture and tree we claim their perspective, merging our lives here in their established frame.

and piles them on the driveway: femur, rib, jawbone with a few flat teeth attached, dozens of thin arced parts. This one for me 40 today. My birthday sent her to the woods and back. Chloe leans in on her knees, arranges the bones along a concrete seam that leads out to the street. In this next decade, she'll go: head off like today, take into her arms all she's curious about. Her line of bones makes an arrow; sun lights them like a sign. She'll go: undeniable as these bones, baffling as what animal they'd make. She's on all fours. The way I labored: some wild thing. She lays out arms and legs; the bones in line make a spine. My height. On the driveway lies my body when it held her inside out. The way she came: when it held her inside out. The way she came: like bones. Gleaming, after living in my dark. Gleaming. So I can always find her.

Driving through this part of Louisiana you can pass four prisons in less than an hour. "The spirit of every age," writes Eric Schlosser, "is manifest in its public works." So this is who we are, the jailers, the jailed. This is the spirit of our age.
"You won't be back will you," asked the inmate who told me he wanted to be a success.  
                                                                + + +  
Try to remember it the way it was. Try to remember what I wore when I visited the prisons. Trying to remember how tall was my boy then. What books I was teaching. Trying to remember how I hoped to add one true and lonely word to the host of texts that bear upon incarceration.
Something about the extra-realism of that peculiar institution caused me to balk, also the resistance of poetry to the conventions of evidentiary writing, notwithstanding top-notch examples to the contrary: Mandelstam, Akhmatova, Wilde, Val ry, Celan, Desnos, et al. After all, I am not them. She asked me to come down, my friend the photographer and I went, and then I wanted to see whether my art could handle that hoe.  
Trying to remember how my skin felt when I opened an envelope of proofs of Deborah Luster's intimate aluminum portraits of the inmates at Transylvania (the site of East Carroll Parish Prison Farm, a minimum-security male prison, now closed); then Angola (the site of Louisiana State Penitentiary, maximum security, ever-growing); then St. Gabriel (the site of the Louisiana Correctional Institution for Women, the LCIW). I was electrified by the first face a young, handsome man blowing smoke out of his nose. Behind every anonymous number, a very specific face.
On the phone my friend had described to me the rich Delta grounds of Angola, 18,000 acres. Angola, where the topsoil is measured not in inches but feet. The former sugarcane plantation lies at the confluence of rivers and borderland of the vermin-and-vine-choked Tunica Hills. Grey pelicans nest on the two prison lakes; alongside the airstrip are the grading sheds, the endless fields of okra and corn. Then there's the prison museum, the prison radio station, the prison monthly magazine; the tracking horses and tracking dogs trained by inmates... and the tree-lined neighborhood of free-world residents, their children bused outside the fence to school. Then the immaculate cinderblock buildings that house the inmates, the administration building, and the death house; the greenhouse and extensive flower beds take away the fencing and it resembles nothing so much as a college campus. The men in maximum number more than the men who lived in my hometown. Then there's the geriatric unit, the award-winning hospice program; the caisson the inmates built to bear the dead in the hand-built coffins to one of the two graveyards inside the prison. In the old burial ground most graves are not identified by name. The caisson is pulled by draft horses, French Quarter style. When the champion of the prison rodeo had a heart attack in the fields, a riderless horse led the final procession. The celebrated inmate's uniform was "retired" to the prison museum.
Everything about Louisiana seems to constitute itself differently from everywhere else in the Union: the food, the idiom, the stuff in the trees, the critters in the water, and the laws, Napoleonic, not mother-country common law. The prisons inevitably mirror differences found in the free world. Where they came up with their mirrors is another mystery. (In maximum, they are made of metal.) The definition of the face is a memory.
Vivid to me is Debbie saying that at the trial of her mother's murderer, she looked around and saw the people sitting on separate sides of the courtroom, the way they do at a wedding, the bride's people, the groom's people, and she tried to take in the damage radiating through the distinct lines the perpetrator's side, the victim's side.
 
Vivid to me is leaving Angola after the first visit and Debbie asking what I thought, and I said (too fast) I thought those were the nicest people I had ever met, and the ironic laughter it provoked in us both, the car yawing. The obvious truth, people are people. Equally, the damage is never limited to perpetrator and victim. Also, that the crimes are not the sum of the criminal any more than anyone is entirely separable from their acts.
 
I remember an afternoon at the iron pile at Transylvania watching the men quietly plait each other's hair between sets at the weight bench. When I asked about a man whose face was severely scarred, a very specific face, with large, direct aquamarine eyes, a guard told me that the man's brother had thrown a tire over his head and set it on fire. This I did not know how to absorb. It was a steaming day; the men were lifting weights and plaiting their hair.
 
I remember Easter weekend at the women's prison. The day before, a long line formed outside the prison-run beauty shop. Inside, the women having their hair fixed were talking back to a soap opera on the small snowy screen. By visiting day the inner courtyard had been transformed into a theme park for the children. A trampoline had been rented, a cotton-candy machine; someone dressed in a bunny suit was organizing an egg hunt. The girls wore starched, flouncy dresses, and the boys white jackets and black, clip-on bow ties. The women were dressed up, too, even the ones shackled at ankle and waist. Deborah photographed all day, nonstop. Identifiable pictures of children would have to be excluded from publication, but people wanted a keepsake. We left before visiting hours ended. It wasn't our place to be there. It wasn't really in us to be there.
Remember sitting in the frigid Holiday Inn bar near St. Gabriel, at the end of one visit to the women's prison, staring at the aquarium, not talking.
Talking to a man who says he has done a lot of time. Lot of time. He should write a book, he says. He wants to be a success. "Hollywood, huh, here I come."
Talking to a woman who says the one time her dad visited her from the Midwest, she asked him to look at her eyes. There was a look she didn't want to get, a faraway look. Her father pretended to examine her eyes, then told her they looked like the same old peepers to him. She passed her time reading. Same way she passed her childhood. She thought she was going to be an astronomer when she grew up. Not a felon.
Both parents are dead now. Of her three sons, one disappeared, one died of suicide, and the third severed contact.
One of the inmates at St. Gabriel informed me she wouldn't be around for visiting hours tomorrow because she was on the drill team. Also, her ex-husband would not be bringing her baby boy to see her. Not tomorrow, not ever.
The grease burns, I am told by another inmate, are courtesy of her sister.
Don't Walk On The Grass, says the sign posted in the inner yard.
Then there's the bus that leaves from Monroe taking visitors to one of four neighboring pens, Al Derry's Prison Transport and Popcorn Balls. Evidently, the popcorn balls make it the competitive ride. Only in Louisiana.
After a time. A lot of time. They stop coming. The free-worlders. They are too poor or too busy working or are already looking after others on the outside or their car is broken or they are too worn down or they move too far off or they get old, sick, and die. So the inmates wait for their turn.
They aren't going anywhere. They have all the time there is.
"The only continuity of our lives," wrote Malcolm Braly, American writer, American lifer, "was that we had none."
"Waiting," goes the motto at St. Gabriel, "it's the LCIW way."
I wrote a woman and asked whether she ever had any pets. She wrote back: Bandit, Baby, Snobby, Elsie, Bear (those were the dogs). Tiger and Fuzzball (the cats), Jill, Ben, and Junior (the coons). And a lot of unnamed fish, hamsters, rabbits, chickens, ducks, geese, guinea pigs, "and a deer, not really a pet but I finally coaxed to the point she would eat out of my hand."
Not to idealize, not to judge, not to exonerate, not to aestheticize immeasurable levels of pain. Not to demonize, not anathematize. What I wanted was to unequivocally lay out the real feel of hard time. I wanted it given to understand that when you pass four prisons in less than an hour, the countryside's apparent emptiness is more legible. It is an open, running comment when the only spike in employment statistics is being created by the supply of people crossing the line.
I wanted the banter, the idiom, the soft-spoken cadence of Louisiana speech to cut through the mass-media myopia. I wanted the heat, the humidity, the fecundity of Louisiana to travel right up the body. What I wanted was to convey the sense of normalcy for which humans strive under conditions that are anything but what we in the free world call normal, no matter what we may have done for which we were never charged.
 
The world of the prison system springs up adjacent to the free world. As the towns decline, the prisons grow. As industries disappear, prisons proliferate, state-funded prison-building surges are complemented by private-investment promising "to be an integral component of your corrections strategy," according to an industry founder. The interrelation of poverty, illiteracy, substance and physical abuse, mental illness, race, and gender to the prison population is blaring to the naked eye and borne out by the statistics. Of the developed nations, only Russia aspires to our rate of incarceration. And the Big Bear is a distant second. Ladies and Gentlemen of the Jury, the warp in the mirror is of our making.
 
The popular perception is that art is apart. I insist it is a part of. Something not in dispute is that people in prison are apart from. If you can accept whatever level of discipline and punishment you adhere to momentarily set aside that the ultimate goal should be to reunite the separated with the larger human enterprise, it might behoove us to see prisoners, among others, as they elect to be seen, in their larger selves. If we go there, if not with our bodies then at least our minds, we are more likely to register the implications.                                                              + + +
 
I am going to prison.
I am going to visit three prisons in Louisiana.
I am going on the heels of my longtime friend Deborah Luster, a photographer.
It is a summons.
All roads are turning into prison roads.
I already feel guilty.
I haven't done anything.
But I allow the mental pull in both directions.
I am going to prison in order to write about it. Like a nineteenth-century traveler.
Kafka put it this way, "Guilt is never to be doubted."
Also: behind every anonymous number, a very specific face.
Also: there are more than two million individuals, in this country, whose sentences have rendered them more or less invisible. Many of them permanently.
First to Transylvania. Then Angola. Then St. Gabriel. These are their place-names
Over the next year and a half Deborah Luster will photograph upwards of 1,500 inmates.
I will make three trips.
It is an almost imperceptible gesture, a flick of the conscience, to go, to see, but I will be wakeful.
It is a summons.                                                              + + +them.                                                               + + +

Darkness is not a death, does not obliterate, will not bury you or take your breath away. Darkness will not erase you the way it erases day with night because darkness is not the clock but merely the time falling away from the clock's circular face. Darkness is not the loss but the thing misplaced, not the hammer but the nail in its curved emergence from wood's grasp, not the storm's insurgence but the limbs broken off from their miraculous suspension in a storm out far, beyond us. Darkness is not about hearts, imperfect as they are, but what leaks through their incorrigible doors, not the stars but the glissade or glide of their dust. Darkness no longer shields the hunters' musk in search of you, or turns you to animal prey, it is only a measure of weight or days. Not something without a beginning or an end, it is not even especially not an end. Nor is it vertigo, nor the whole, but merely a piece. No, darkness is but a ghost of an idea, the least remembered, most estranged prayer, and your fear but a lingering, limbic fear torn from shreds of forgotten years. Only that much is clear.  

Money changed hands. It s how we came to be Came to be planted here in the mortar In the miniature cash forest Aster greenwood ficus hemlock Taproot stipe calyx anther in the Mortal hereafter Hearing hands making money change.   Speak up. I can t hear you. There s something wrong with your voice. You re speaking too fast. Slow up. Speak into the currency. It wants to bone you. It wants to receive Your warmth in its coffers. Listen up. I ve a fee to see to A toll-man a drawbridge. Open up. Close up. You have a cross bite In your crown, palate-ax. Bite down. Bite my ball Bearing interest.   I m a businessman. I own a plant. I bid for it, bought it, soiled it, drowned it Tilled it, scolded it, heaved into it, stole from it Wept unto it A token in its behalf, suffered a stem                                    To rise in it                                  To market, to market                                  In my dirty jumpsuit                                  Worthlessness.  

there are some things up there uptown   I want to see   I want to see    I'm going to look at that and see   I want to go up and see   that show. That show   I went to see, I went to see.   There are some things up   there   uptown   I want to   look at that and see. I'm going to see   what I look. What I look at, when I look, vessel,   I stood to see. I went to stand to look   to see. Venturing further I went outside myself to look at that wall. It fed! There was a box inside that was not blank, I saw it. It was really different from an aura, the thing had   colors, the thing was talking   to itself. And spoke   to me, not incidentally.  

Let s go out and buy something. In the sun.   No, let s stay home and make something, the sun floods the room. It could be green, on paper. It could be money. That s the way to create new matter.   That s how I detach boats from moorings my boat, my mooring       the harbor shallow in low tide   skiff propelled over buffeting sands flats on   sheer puissance.

asleep you become a continent  undiscovered, mysterious, long, your legs mountain ranges encircling valleys, ravines   night slips past your eyelids, your breath the swaying of the sea, sprawled across the bed like a dolphin washed ashore, your mouth   is the mouth of a sated volcano, O fragrant timber, how do you burn?do  you are so near, and yet so far   as you doze like a lily at my side, I undo myself and invoke the moon  I m a dog watching over your sleep

We piled planks, sheets of tin, & sandbags across the creek till the bright water rose & splayed both sides, swelling into our hoorah. Our hard work brought July thrashers & fat June bugs in decades of dead leaves. Water moccasins hid in holes at the brim of the clay bank as the creek eased up pelvic bones, hips, navel, & chest, to eye level. When the boys dove into our swim hole we pumped our balled fists to fire up their rebel yells. The Jim Crow birds sang of persimmon & mayhaw after a 12-gauge shotgun sounded in the deep woods. If we ruled the day an hour the boys would call girl cousins & sisters, & they came running half-naked into a white splash, but we could outrun the sunset through sage & rabbit tobacco, born to hide each other s alibis beneath the drowned sky.

Tremendous orange things are happening somewhere. I lay a wooden stick for stirring on the white note on the desk. I lay a stain on the clean note. Somewhere things are happening. Marvelous orange and purple things. Flooding rivers at dusk, wheels threading roads in the desert. Strangers. Strangers. Sea. Somewhere you are lying in a white bed. The clock on your thigh is ticking. Somewhere a human form is being lifted from the ground. Somewhere, yes, and I am counting. The clean note with its numbers has changed. I will remember. You are a location, with a bed. The road ends somewhere in the flooding river at dusk. Why here, strangers. A cartwheel in the stow hold of a ship. A stranger who wheels it on the ice. Somewhere the ship has frozen. The ship has frozen in the ice. A frozen form. The ship cannot be lifted from the purple sky at dusk. Stain in the somewhere. You are lying in a white bed. Why here is the river. On the thigh. Remember what we did with clocks. Orange and purple. Lovely trees in the frozen sky. Holding somewhere and threading thighs. Strangers. I lay a stain on the white bed. Remembering what tremendous purple things we did. The mind ends every thing stirring. Somewhere the ship is being lifted from the desert. Marvelous. You will change from the river location to the sea. Somewhere, things are happening. You are lying in the white bed beside the sea with coffee. I am lying in the white bed. Tremendous strangers. Blind roads in the sea.

I am water, only because you are the ocean. We are here, only because old leaves have been falling. A mulching of memories folding into buried hands. The cliffs we learn to edge. The tree trunk hollowed, humming. I am a tongue, only because you are the body planting stories with thumb. Soil crumbs cling to your knees. Small stacks of empty clay pots dreaming. I am an air plant suspended, only because you are the trunk I cling to. I am the milky fish eye, only because it s your favorite. Even the sound you make when your lips kiss the opelu socket is a mo olelo. A slipper is lost in the yard. A haku lei is chilling in the icebox. I am a cup for feathers, only because you want to fill the hours. I am a turning wrist, only because you left the hose on. Heliconias are singing underwater. Beetles are floating across the yard.

The Linguisticator meets you at Carrefour.Un vrai galant, he buys you rouge   l vres.Un vrai galantrouge   l vres Teaches socially accepted forms of extrication. If someone gropes you, say Arr te tes b tises.Arr te tes b tises If someone wonders why your hair is mussed, say C est le mistral.C est le mistral If someone asks you to admire their ugly baby, say Je me sauve  and leave.Je me sauve The Linguisticator is a veritable language experience. You programmed him in Oregon but he caught a virus. Now his Frenchness is cent fois off the spectrum.cent fois Sings Aznavour as you tour the centre historique and Piaf on the tram;centre historiquePadam, Padam, when it clangs.Padam, Padam The Linguisticator can stop a tram with one raised eyebrow, one soi-disant eyebrow. A fatalist, he has abandoned cautionsoi-disant with certain potent liquors of the region. Ask him if he s OK,  he ll sayLe silence  ternel de ces vastes espaces m effraie.Le silence  ternel de ces vastes espaces m effraie Ask him what irony means, he saysTout pour le mieux dans ce meilleur des mondes possibles.Tout pour le mieux dans ce meilleur des mondes possibles. But if his ennui peaks, he suspends all conversation. Broods for hours muttering Putain,Putainje suis rien qu un two-bit trompe l  il.je suis rien qu un two-bit trompe l  il Malaise on a loop. It never fades.

I heard a cough as if a thief was there outside my sleep a sharp intake of air a fox in her fox-fur stepping across the grass in her black gloves barked at my house just so abrupt and odd the way she went hungrily asking in the heart's thick accent in such serious sleepless trespass she came a woman with a man's voice but no name as if to say: it's midnight and my life is laid beneath my children like gold leaf

My damn cat brings me a dead songbird, wren or finch, I don t know what it is  I mistook at first its folded grey for a strangely shaped piece of lint in the cubicle beneath my desk nor which cat for I have two: Cricket with her dense body and stubby legs who jumps down from every shelf so reverberatingly, I call her the Black Bomb, or Ingrid, the quiet Russian Blue, whom I call Gritty because her coat is stealthy with dust. They re always leaving me offerings the mouse upon the threshold when I return from some trip, the redheaded grosbeak on the sill  but death is different in the front yard or even on the threshold, than Death on a particular morning, crawling into the house,into  carrying a warm form frozen in its warm mouth, tongue and tooth salivating a fluff of warble and whistle into a smoothly folded, iced, silenced thing, Death triumphant, affectionate! as if anyone would be happyaffectionate!  feeding upon dead songs torn from the air.  

Rintrah roars and shakes his fires in the burdened air; Hungry clouds swag on the deep. Once meek, and in a perilous path, The just man kept his course along The vale of death. Roses are planted where thorns grow, And on the barren heath Sing the honey bees. Then the perilous path was planted: And a river and a spring On every cliff and tomb; And on the bleached bones Red clay brought forth. Till the villain left the paths of ease, To walk in perilous paths, and drive The just man into barren climes. Now the sneaking serpent walks In mild humility, And the just man rages in the wilds Where lions roam. Rintrah roars and shakes his fires in the burdened air; Hungry clouds swag on the deep.   

I..Sleep faster, my son says. He s pokingSleep faster, at my eyelids, pulling at the pillows, the helicopter hum of anticipation rising in his throat as I reach out and spin him onto the bed. I want to set my heels once more in the soft underbelly of his childhood,   airlift him from danger, from disease, from all his fears, which are maybe not even his fears at all, but only mine. Yet now as he hovers above me, my body splayed out like my father s before me, my every breath is less a prayer than a love letter torn open in desperation.   II. Remember, I say, when we counted to six million, a visualization of tragedy, one half hour a day  for two years, and that, for the tribe only; it would take another whole year for the gypsies, the Catholics, the gays, the foreigners, the Negroes, the artists, the philosophers, etc.   You were barely six at the time, your mother wondering what the hell I was thinking, and even now I can t fathom why I didn t just hold you close  It would have taken only a moment  And say whatever it was that I really wanted to say.   III. I m watching Batman reruns when the telephone rings.Holy Charoset, I yell at the kitchen wall, call back later.Holy Charosetcall back later Maybe I threw some raisins, I don t remember. We re already married, your mother and I,             but at the time, don t ask, I was living alone.    And so I m laughing, mostly from boredom, but still, laughing, while my father lay dying, gasping for breath in some dirty gutter, gunned down for a half-empty briefcase, a gefilte fish sandwich, and a New York Post which the next day would have his picture on the twenty-eighth page; one more dead Jew.     IV. You burst into the room, fifth grade facts burning your tongue like Moses  coal. 100 people die every minute, you tell me100 people die every minute as I turn down the TV; and then, gleefully: 50 since I ve been  50 since I ve been  in this room, and now 75 and now . . . O my little census bureau,in this room, and now 75 and now . . .  my prince of darkness, my prophet of numbers, riddle me this:   how many grains of sand before you can call it a desert? And where were you the day Kennedy was shot? CNN, interrupting, asks. My grandmother clicks her tongue like she s chopping onions in the old country. Poor boy, she says, pointing.. Poor boy, And there s John-John again, waving that little flag, still saluting.     V. And who will remember my father when I am gone? And how many have died since his death? And what s one more. or one less. And what do I know of my father s father? I m waiting outside, engine humming, as my son, eighteen, registers. And now he s shouting,   running towards me, arms pumping above his head. He s Moses the moment before spying the golden calf. He s his great grandfather crawling underground to freedom. He s my father flying medical supplies, surviving the crash. My mother must have held him close. You re home, she cries, safe.You re home, safe   VI. Vietnam, I say, or Sarajevo.  Afghanistan, my son answers, or Iraq. My father would have said Germany. He could have said Japan. Nobody says anonymously. Nobody says Gotham. Korea, my cousin says, or Kosovo.  My great grandfather  says South Africa. His great grandfather says Spain.   Somebody says Egypt now; somebody, Egypt then. Nobody says suddenly. Nobody says Brooklyn. I m counting myself to sleep, when my wife hears a sound at the door. Careful,Careful she whispers. We re alone, in an empty house; my every breath reminding me I m older than my father, on the day of his death.                     VII.There are more people breathing this very moment, my son insists, There are more people breathing this very momentthan have ever died. He s home from college, so I don t double-check.than have ever died He s driven a long way to surprise me on my birthday. Are you sure you can t stay, I ask, holding him close. He looks full of hope; a woman I ve never seen before at his side. Welcome home,   I tell my wife. She s just turned twenty-four. I m childless, fatherless. It s the day of the funeral; Nineteen years until the twin towers. Three thousand since Moses murdered the overseer. But that s not what I m thinking. One, two, three,Onetwo, three she says, guiding me inside. How could we not fall back in love?  

How to get to it:                the heart within the corset                made of whalebone and Parisian leaded satin,                               winter weight.   I can barely breathe.   Sun filters from high windows                into this dark-paneled room   where my sister helps me step into the skirt,                               our grandmother s grandmother s sent-for dress, its pinprick satin buttons down my chest.                We hook each hook to hold the corset flush,                               to anchor the bustle, as she did for her quiet February wedding,                snow covering the steeple of the Seamen s Bethel.                                 Melville: This, shipmates, is that other lesson:This, shipmates, is that other lesson   fasten the locks, hold the heart within its watery chamber.                                              When the seamstress slid the bone into the bodice                and pinned each cut piece together,                               the satin stood upright at the sewing table. She could almost                see it breathe.   I am swallowed and swallowed whole. It outlasts                               all our vows.  

Because he was 38, because this was his second job, because he had two daughters, because his hands looked like my father's, because at 7 he would walk to the furniture warehouse, unload trucks 'til 3 AM, because I was fourteen and training him, because he made $3.75 an hour, because he had a wife to look in the face, because he acted like he respected me, because he was sick and would not call out I didn't blink when the water dropped from his nose into the onion's perfectly circular mouth on the Whopper Jr. I coached him through preparing. I did not blink. Tell me this didn't happen. I dare you.

Each time the babies came I knew they would be gone by morning. Bright as bulbs turned out of beds, hard and full of promise. Bodies on the brink of unfolding. I could not hold them and I could not hold them long enough. It was a sin to let them in. I did not expect them to stay. I did not expect their forgiveness when I turned away.

I have never needed God as a personal savior in my practical life syllogisms about His existence were never music to my ears but always seemed vague missing a dimension although I didn t know how to say this. Neither a philosophical God nor a biblical God suddenly appears among His creations amid revelations of wisdom in Jerusalem, His city. And certainly not in disclosures of pious inner principles and also not among poets, unfortunately. Astronomical bodies at night and mystical landscapes in Sharafat for example and Beit Jala bear His between-the-lines existence, His inklings. The expression of an ultra-Orthodox man s eyes in Mea She arim    this too    and even the purifying surrender of a sly and seasoned merchant, irreligious now in Geula, when you reproach him. Something like  Reprove a wise man and he will love you.  And you, when you cleanse yourself of anxious constraints about your environment after taking hash or grass. Springs of purity whose origins you re unaware of bubble in coursing blood, in glands, in milk and some paradisiacal primeval revelation, and your almost subconscious innerness your being suddenly revealed    Is this clear enough to you, heredity? Genes? Or existential uniqueness, a maintained infancy that knocks you out with a sense of a refreshing genesis. Everything becomes clear in a great light. You shed revulsion and resistance, a great love germinates within you    this gloriousness this wonder comprised of absolutes of    objective truth, complete justice, decency honor internalized honesty and complex wisdom enhanced down to the last detail. Ho, complete, divine purity. Suddenly you polish a syllogism of your own for decisive proof of His existence: God is an idea    ideas don t have material existence but they exist nonetheless so God exists definitively as the spirit of an idea, the biblical assertion  He has no body and no bodily form  is clear to me now as an exegesis that sits well with philosophy.    Translated from the HebrewTranslated from the HebrewTranslated from the HebrewTranslated from the Hebrew

Lots of time, lots of cars, Lots of money, so much love, Very cold and very hot. But now it s freezing out, The director Lanzmann is giving us an interview, Without, it must be said, Much passion. This man was intimate with Simone de Beauvoir And worked alongside Sartre. But that s later. For now Channel One Is filming him en faceen face In the next room And we can make out A few scattered remarks. His nine-hour film About the Holocaust Played in every Country    People nodded off, And in their dreams They saw the horrors And the voice of our famous guest Faded in and faded out. It fades in, fades out, In the hall The beautiful Camilla comes and goes. She perches on the sofa Then she walks away. The assistant to the cultural attach  Of the French Embassy Is also here. She s the one Who signed up me and Kolya For this interview with Lanzmann. She s also beautiful and young. A little older than us But she looks younger. Whereas me and Kolya, We don t want to look younger. One of us is thirty-three, The other s thirty-four. Not yet at the peak Of our powers, We re gathering force And preparing to strike. We re like Lanzmann Who at the age of eighteen Joined the French Communist Party. He joined not because He read Marx or Lenin But because he was asked By his friends In the Resistance. We are like Lanzmann Who cried when he learned Of the death of Stalin. He cried not because He loved Stalin But because he was Sentimental: He saw Soviet Sailors Lowering their flags to half-mast, And thought about how The Soviet people Had absorbed, During the war, The most terrible And frightful blows. We are like Lanzmann Who in 1949 Made the acquaintance Of Sartre and Simone De Beauvoir. He began to work with them On the magazineLes Tempes modernes.Les Tempes modernes And today he is That publication s Editor in chief. We are like Lanzmann Who in 1972 Made the filmIsrael, Why,Israel, Why Which, in the words Of the online encyclopedia,  Did not shy away from Difficult questions.  We discussed all our questions In advance of the interview. Inside us it was as if Some keys, cold and hot, Were rattling. It s nearly freezing out. Meanwhile I was thinking about how Kolya is a rude artist.rude In the sense that There are radical artists Everywhere you look, But not so many Genuinely rude artists. The rudeness of an artist, I thought, Is an interesting quality. But now Channel One is leaving, Kolya takes off his jacket with its skulls And sets up our cameras.  We are the representatives of the left,  we say. Lanzmann lowers his gaze wearily: Now they re going to start in about Israel. But Kolya, having explained a bit About his art collective, Asks Lanzmann instead About monumental Art:  Monumental Art. What might it look like Right now?   How should I know?  Says Lanzmann.  There could be no Monumental Art Today. The world is scattered. For A monumental Work you need A unified sense Of the world.   But you yourself Filmed a monumental Work. Surely you have Some ideas on this score?   I didn t think about That. I m an artist, Understand? I don t Think in such Categories. What are you, Communists? Your task is The Revolution. Why are you asking Me about Monumental Art?  We re the ones asking the questions We re the ones asking the questions We            here                        are the ones                                                  asking the questions. In the iron air Of Moscow. Edelman, Markelov, Pechersky are with us. Medvedev the Bear Jew and Jeff  The Snowman  Monson    That s what they call us Around town.  In what capacity Did you make that film    As a Frenchman, a Jew, An intellectual? Or as a member Of the Resistance?   I repeat, I wanted    ...              Does the term The  Holocaust Industry  Mean anything to you?   What s that?  Asks Lanzmann. (I warned Kolya That Lanzmann wouldn t Understand Or would pretend Not to understand What that means.)  The Holocaust Industry Usually means The use of the memory Of the destruction of the Jews During World War II To legitimate, in part, The State of Israel.  The translator starts To worry. She suspects us Of anti-Semitism. But we are like Lanzmann Who came                              to Moscow To do this strange interview, Without revealing his secrets. He won t talk, He s hard as a rock, This man whose youth Is reflected In our cocky Faces. Lanzmann himself has conducted Many interviews: With Franz Suchomel, The SS Unterscharf hrer, With  Jan Karski, And others. He knows very well How to walk His subjects Into this or that Confession Or experience, All while leveraging His moral authority. And here, gradually, In the words of this master Of the interview, We begin to detect The artistic position Which we so oppose.  I, you know, just Slapped together this Thing. I was interested In the human aspect. As for ideas And theories That s not my bag.        Of course, many artists Take this stand. They don t interest us at all. But Lanzmann, on the one hand, Enjoys this status As an artist who works with Emotions, memories, His own and other people s Experiences, that is, more with Emotions than with documents. On the other hand, he knew Full well that his film Would be received As a political proclamation, That it would quickly occupy the heart Of intellectual and socio- Political debates. To work on people s feelings, As an artist, while at the same time Refusing to engage in rational Explanations, of the sort Demanded of intellectuals   really This is the same stuff as using the  Incomprehensibility  of Hitler Or the destruction of the Jews As a form of political argument    And this is the shameful Hypocrisy of our friend Lanzmann. How to save himself From this disgrace The old man Lanzmann Does not know. But we know, and we ll tell: You need to speak about Israel You need to speak about Israel In this is the key to immortality This is the burning wound And it is Lanzmann who understands this He knows that politics is the wound On the body of history. An unnecessary, unwanted wound That will not heal. To refuse to forget politics To refuse to tear Israel From one s heart    Because politics is Always here, And Palestine is a bloody wound that says: Politics is Always here. You can t hide from it At the supermarket, You can t run from it With beautiful words. And old man Lanzmann Understands this, He knows that Politics is the wound On the body of history. In its inability to process its own Information, A rejection of politics Leads to senility. (Only later would I find This passage In an interview Lanzmann gave To Der Spiegel:Der SpiegelSpiegel: You writeSpiegel That the Israeli military doctor Who gave you a check-up Before you flew in a fighter plane Said you could live Until a hundred and twenty. Are you worried about Death right now, At your age? Lanzmann: I have no age. I constantly think Of death, including My own. At the same time This remains totally Unreal. As I said Earlier, only life Has any meaning.)        Does the term The  Holocaust Industry  Mean anything to you?   I don t want To talk About Israel. I repeat: You are thinking In abstract Categories.   Yes, but your film Became the center Of intellectual Debate    About the uniqueness Of the Holocaust, About the supposed Anti-Semitism Of the Poles. Many Thought that your movie Made the Poles out To be Anti-Semites.   Israel exists Under impossible Pressure. Its army must be judged According to different measures. The Israeli Merkava tank Was created In impossible conditions. Israeli tank officers Love their Merkavas, They are obliged To have them always At the ready. And you, instead of Building up Abstract Theories, Should try harder To create artistic works ...     An artist has his own Way of seeing.  And so on. The director is tired. It s time for a rest.  Communists? I know your path. First, revolution; then firing squads.  A warning from the attach     Our time Is almost up. This will be Our last question And our judgment of the gray Old man Will be simple. He has just one moment left To die young. But what did the fog of those eyes Communicate? Vague sentence fragments, A dry, unpleasant refusal?        Hang in there, boys. Be strong just one more time. Communists never surrender.    Translated from the RussianTranslated from the RussianTranslated from the RussianTranslated from the Russian

Very small and damaged and quite dry, a Roman water nymph made of bone tries to summon a river out of limestone very eroded faded her left arm missing and both legs from the knee down a Roman water nymph made of bone tries to summon a river out of limestone exhausted        utterly worn down a Roman water nymph made of bone being the last known speaker of her language she tries to summon a river out of limestone little distant sound of dry grass        try again a Roman water nymph made of bone very endangered now in a largely unintelligible monotone she tries to summon a river out of limestone little distant sound as of dry grass     try again exquisite bone figurine with upturned urn in her passionate self-esteem she smiles looking sideways she seemingly has no voice but a throat-clearing rustle as of dry grass                                        try again she tries leaning pouring pure outwardness out of a grey urn little slithering sounds as of a rabbit man in full night-gear, who lies so low in the rickety willowherb that a fox trots out of the woods and over his back and away              try again she tries leaning pouring pure outwardness out of a grey urn little lapping sounds        yes as of dry grass secretly drinking        try again little lapping sounds    yes as of dry grass secretly drinking        try again Roman bone figurine year after year in a sealed glass case having lost the hearing of her surroundings she struggles to summon a river out of limestone little shuffling sound as of approaching slippers year after year in a sealed glass case a Roman water nymph made of bone she struggles to summon a river out of limestone little shuffling sound as of a nearly dried-up woman not really moving through the fields having had the gleam taken out of her to the point where she resembles twilight        try again little shuffling clicking she opens the door of the church little distant sounds of shut-away singing    try again little whispering fidgeting of a shut-away congregation wondering who to pray to little patter of eyes closing                                    try again very small and damaged and quite dry a Roman water nymph made of bone she pleads she pleads a river out of limestone little hobbling tripping of a nearly dried-up river not really moving through the fields, having had the gleam taken out of it to the point where it resembles twilight. little grumbling shivering last-ditch attempt at a river more nettles than water                                        try again very speechless very broken old woman her left arm missing and both legs from the knee down she tries to summon a river out of limestone little stoved-in sucked thin low-burning glint of stones rough-sleeping and trembling and clinging to its rights victim of Swindon puddle midden slum of over-greened foot-churn and pats whose crayfish are cheap tool-kits made of the mud stirred up when a stone's lifted   it's a pitiable likeness of clear running struggling to keep up with what's already gone the boat the wheel the sluice gate the two otters larricking along                                     go on and they say oh they say in the days of better rainfall it would flood through five valleys there'd be cows and milking stools washed over the garden walls and when it froze you could skate for five miles      yes go on little loose end shorthand unrepresented beautiful disused route to the sea fish path with nearly no fish in  

He had to have it, his mother told him. How could he not, with so few left in the world? He felt heaviest at night with the miracle of it. He was a vessel now. A receptacle for a threatened being. What if he rose too fast and killed it? Or maybe his stillness would do it, too much sitting around, stunned and hungry. And what if the bear emerged alive and another formed in its place, would he have to have that one, too, and another one after that? 
 He dreamed of the panda s tiny eyes opening inside him, the doctor s wide incision, a whirring pain, and then the furry thing emerging, the bear turning to him as to a stranger and whether that would be it his bit part in the history of the future. 
  

When I was laughed at for my clumsy English, I touched my throat. Which said ear when my ear said year and year after yearearyear I pronounced a new thing wrong and other throats laughed.Elevator. Library. Vibrating bells in their mouths.Elevator. Library. How to say azalea. How to say forsythia.azaleaforsythia Say instead golden bells. Say I m in ESL. In French classI m in ESL a boy whose last name is Kring called me belle.belle Called me by my Korean name, pronouncing it wrong. Called it loudly, called attention to my alien. (I touched the globe moving in my throat, a hemisphere sinking.) Called me across the field lined with golden bells. I wanted to run and be loved at the same time. By Kring. As in ring of people. Where are you going? We re laughing with you.Where are you going? We re laughing  you. The bell in our throat that rings with laughter is called uvula. From uva: grape.uva A theory: special to our species, this grape-bell has to do with speech. Which separates us from animals. Kring looked at me and saidJust curious, do you eat dogs? and I wanted to end my small life.Just curious, do you eat dogs? Be reborn a golden retriever of North America. Lie on a field lined with golden bells, loved. Today, in a country where dogs are more cherished than a foreign child, an Oregon Senate candidate says no to refugees. Says, years ago, Vietnamese refugees ate dogs,harvested other people s pets. Harvest as in harvest grapes.harvestedHarvestharvestHarvest as in harvest a field of golden rice. As do peopleHarvestharvest from rice countries. As in people-eat-dog worlds. Years ago, 1923 Japan, the phrase j goen gojissen was usedj goen gojissen to set apart Koreans: say 15 yen 50 sen. The colonized who used the chaos15 yen 50 sen of the Kanto Earthquake to poison waters, set fire: a cruelty special to our species. A cruelty special to our species   how to say j go, how to say gojit,j gogojit how j go sounds like die in Korean, how gojit sounds like lie   j godiegojitlielie, lie, library, azalea, library.lie, lie, library, azalea, library.I m going to the library, I lied, years ago, on a field lined with forsythia.I m going to the library

As I walked up the Rue des Martyrs with my bag of small, perfect, waxy potatoes I doffed my imaginary hat to Monsieur Parmentier. Well, I do have a hat and wore it a lot not so long ago to cover a healing wound on my forehead but this wasn t necessary anymore, and anyway the hat wasn t with me now in Paris. Nor was Monsieur Parmentier, though any remains of him lie in a plot in P re Lachaise ringed by potato plants.I would not be intending to cook my potatoes if not for the duplicitous actions of Parmentier back in the late years of the 18th century. After he d realized that this odd-shaped tuber looted from the Incas in Peru (along with their gold and silver) was extremely nutritious, and no one would believe him, he d come up with a ruse. Using money given to him by King Louis XVI, he purchased a plot of impoverished ground outside Paris, in Neuilly-sur-Seine, and planted it with potatoes. When the time to dig them came, he built a fence around them and put armed guards outside it. These men wore uniforms the color of potatoes. They were told to leak the news that they were guarding an extremely precious food. Then, one night, they left their post. Thieves arrived within a couple of hours and stole the entire crop. Over the next few days the potatoes were sold in the city s markets as the food of kings.So my guests wouldn t know they would be eating the food of kings. Nor would I tell them, though I might well concoct a story about the breed of pigs their pork chops had come from. And the posh wine that had yielded the wine vinegar I d used in the salad dressing. I could try telling them I d climbed over the fence of P re Lachaise the previous night, armed with a phone-torch, a troweling spade, and a canvas bag, and dug the potatoes from Monsieur Parmentier s plot   only taking the small ones that were right for pommes saut es, of course   but I know they wouldn t believe me.pommes saut esI was distracted from these smug reveries by my mobile phone ringing. I dug it out of my pocket and answered it, thinking one advantage of being in France was that nobody rang me. The voice at the other end was not one I recognized. It said, at first quietly,  Are you OK?  then in a louder voice,  Please tell me you re OK over there,  and that was it. When I went to check the number, it had been withheld. What had I landed myself in, I wondered? I went home to deal with my 19th-century French meal.

fish carcass say hello to pork rind + arborio rice while castaway caraway puree returns home to deconstruct wilted carrot from its butter + herb remnants fish carcass say goodbye to a knife fight between under-marinated onion slice + wasted redbor kale amidst a gun battle between grilled salmon + paprika fish carcass say goodnight to electrolytes + magnesium as a chemical imbalance takes place inside the borderline cod meat fish carcass say good morning to anti-griddle + orange liqueur whose pre-conditional love for salt + bitterness reminiscent of caviar + pancetta vinaigrette has put quail eggs under the cloche fish carcass say midday to emu eggs while the sun twirls inside a decadent basket of fish sauce without making the plastic mattress, walk-in refrigerator, + bacon sabayon feel left out fish carcass say cloud nine say egginess say shell-shocked say cornichon say it angelo say italian meringue say calf liver say republic of georgia say lavash say turnpike turnips say succotash say yuzu marmalade say overcooked quail say chef teah evans say fish head say into a barrel say bacon fat say baby corn say flavor profile say with victory say the gods are with me say no guts no glory say did not materialize say story on a plate

My love, how time makes hardness shine. They come in every color, pure or mixed gray-green of basalt, blood-soaked jasper, quartz, granite and feldspar, even bits of glass, smoothed by the patient jeweller of the tides.   Volcano-born, earthquake-quarried, shaven by glaciers, wind-carved, heat-cracked, stratified, speckled, bright in the wet surf  no two alike, all torn from the dry land tossed up in millions on this empty shore.   How small death seems among the rocks. It drifts light as a splintered bone the tide uncovers. It glints among the shattered oyster shells, gutted by gulls, bleached by salt and sun  the broken crockery of living things.   Cormorants glide across the quiet bay. A falcon watches from the ridge, indifferent to the burdens I have carried here. No point in walking farther, so I sit, hollow as driftwood, dead as any stone.

Women who sleep on stones are like brick houses that squat alone in cornfields. They look weatherworn, solid, dusty, torn screens sloughing from the window frames. But at dusk a second-story light is always burning.   Used to be I loved nothing more than spreading my blanket on high granite ledges that collect good water in their hollows. Stars came close without the trees staring and rustling like damp underthings.   But doesn t the body foil what it loves best? Now my hips creak and their blades are tender. I can t rest on my back for fear of exposing my gut to night creatures who might come along and rip it open with a beak or hoof.   And if I sleep on my belly, pinning it down, my breasts start puling like baby pigs trapped under their slab of torpid mother. Dark passes as I shift from side to side to side, the blood pooling just above the bone.   Women who sleep on stones don t sleep. They see the stars moving, the sunrise, the gnats rising like a hairnet lifted from a waitress s head. The next day they re sore all over and glad for the ache: that s how stubborn they are.

Ah yes - they justify it all, the brats, hungry or asleep and gorged with milk. Each drop's (yes, the milk they drink is yours) another line unwritten, another page crumpled like a pufiball on the floor. Your limpid dialogue is reduced to the basic syllables of the cave and the quick infant minds grow huge, while you relearn vocabularies from the pram. The typewriter is now a battered toy, its ribbon has fingerprinted all the walls (cenotaphs for dead letters all its keys). You tap the heads assailing your broad lap and polarise regret and love them while the cunning offspring of your milk and blood root up the truffles of your mind.  

Novel unbegun, half-loaf rising, lighthouse northward and anchor south.   Lemon to grapefruit, you sleep-step sidewise, turnover, pop-up, tongue in the mouth.  

     Manatu, 2013 Manatu, 2013Manatu

In today's correspondence a poetry book detailing the lives of British Queens  with a note enclosed and a question: what does it mean to be a Queen? I could reply and say   this precious stone set in a silver sea: a symbol, like a banner, for mens' love. But these are not my words. I could reply and say  glorying in the glories of my people, sorrowing with the sorrows of the lowest. But these are not my words. I could declare  that each Queen is tissue paper thin, transluscent but combined, are my flesh. But I will not solidify my words, instead I will command my secretary to write, with many kind thanks for the little book etc, but to say my thoughts on Queenship can only be ascertained by my actions.

I live in a room by the sea, where the view is great and the food is free. Some of the tenants come and go. Some I eat, if they're too slow. One end of me is firmly locked. The other end just gently rocks. I live in a room by the sea. It's perfect for an anemone. 

It was too big to take on the subway so she came to it every day that winter in the room where it waited on one foot, sly seabird.   She sat down and opened her hands, parted the wings one by one till it flew ahead of her fingers singing the lame foot skidding on gold.   The sun turned its back on the glass and paled as she sat obstinate green-eyed her foot on its foot pumping.   The fire died. Snow hissing at the window. Above her head a baroque hailstorm failed in 4/4 time. She sang, unable to hold the bright hinge to her heart. Lame savior she sang. It bowed as she left and sat, chastened by scales, wondering.  

Far far from gusty waves these children's faces. Like rootless weeds, the hair torn round their pallor: The tall girl with her weighed-down head. The paper- seeming boy, with rat's eyes. The stunted, unlucky heir Of twisted bones, reciting a father's gnarled disease, His lesson, from his desk. At back of the dim class One unnoted, sweet and young. His eyes live in a dream Of squirrel's game, in tree room, other than this. On sour cream walls, donations. Shakespeare's head, Cloudless at dawn, civilized dome riding all cities. Belled, flowery, Tyrolese valley. Open-handed map Awarding the world its world. And yet, for these Children, these windows, not this map, their world, Where all their future's painted with a fog, A narrow street sealed in with a lead sky Far far from rivers, capes, and stars of words. Surely, Shakespeare is wicked, the map a bad example. With ships and sun and love tempting them to steal   For lives that slyly turn in their cramped holes From fog to endless night? On their slag heap, these children Wear skins peeped through by bones and spectacles of steel With mended glass, like bottle bits on stones. All of their time and space are foggy slum. So blot their maps with slums as big as doom. Unless, governor, inspector, visitor, This map becomes their window and these windows That shut upon their lives like catacombs, Break O break open till they break the town And show the children to green fields, and make their world Run azure on gold sands, and let their tongues Run naked into books the white and green leaves open History theirs whose language is the sun.  

he came in his seedy brown jacket smelling of paint.   all thumbs, a man stumbling over his own muscles, unable to hold some part of himself and rock it, gently.   she gave up, seeing him come in the door, wanting to show him her flat belly just an hour before, looking at her own corpse in the mirror.   she lay there reduced, neither virgin nor mother. it had been decided.   the winter was too cold in the garage. they would live with her mother.   the old bedroom was already prepared, cleaned, the door opened.   the solitary twin bed remained; he would sleep on the porch. she looked at him and tried to feel her way into the body of a woman, a thing which has to be taken care of, held safely in his arms. she lay there, trying to hold on to what she had, knowing she had to let it go.

Deer do not tremble, I know this. My bone and sinew twisted into fallow slenderness and the tibia twig thin. Four rods finished with a cloven hoof planted on rotting leaf mould: gloomy weight of the gold altar. The poet's words are wind-blown apples. Plucked lute strings vibrate to silence as I watch Caesar with my velvet eyes,   long ears poised to absorb the rush of animal clamour that is hushed in the shells of human skulls. Despite the blood threat of power my doe body would not spring away   no flick of spotted fur into shadow.

What I expected, was Thunder, fighting, Long struggles with men And climbing. After continual straining I should grow strong; Then the rocks would shake And I rest long. What I had not foreseen Was the gradual day Weakening the will Leaking the brightness away, The lack of good to touch, The fading of body and soul Smoke before wind, Corrupt, unsubstantial. The wearing of Time, And the watching of cripples pass With limbs shaped like questions In their odd twist, The pulverous grief Melting the bones with pity, The sick falling from earth - These, I could not foresee.   Expecting always Some brightness to hold in trust Some final innocence Exempt from dust, That, hanging solid, Would dangle through all Like the created poem, Or the faceted crystal.  

spare us your burial rites spare us the first rib the flood, the resurrection spare us your dairy & meats your belief in a life after this one heaven s a city we ve been priced out of our mothers fled for more affordable children for the price of liver heaven wants nothing to do with pleasure on earth on this the occasion of my brother s wedding i need something awful done to my body heaven s a boy who wants me to crawl through his mother s midnight-window heaven s the condom splitting into light heaven s not a place more a wound i make & pass through when we re done he asks how many men i ve fucked this month & not loved spare me the quilt & blankets spare me the look in his eyes when he takes me careful as a poison inside him spare me the lecture on the survival of my body & i will spare you my body

     1.  Naked woman surrounded by police : that s one way to start the poem. But would she mean anything devoid of her context, in this case a lushly late-August deciduous forest, some maple, mostly oak? She carries no prop for example, no bike chain, which the cops could be sawing from the tree trunk that she s wedded to her body. But let s start with her pure, and untranslated, as the famous cartoon of the door is a mystery until we post the word LADIES at a point that would be four feet up from the ground if this door were not drawn two inches tall it s us,us, you see, who make believe it corresponds to a  true-life  human door. Does it help if I say the naked woman is  really  my true- life friend, she of the tangled dago surname we don t need to get into here? And if I say next that she has been swimming in Lake Tiorati         2. you can see how straightaway the tangling subdivides into (a) where the hell is Lake Tiorati? and (b) why naked? to the last let me answer that it s 1978 and she is twenty; at college she s been reading Simone de Beauvoir and learning words like patriarchy and oppression.patriarchy oppression. And these have been Mixmastered into her thinking even about swimsuits i.e., that not to wear one is to rip the sign off the door and stomp it underfoot. When she lies on a rock the last thing she expects is the tingling she feels now against her wrist, from a guy peeing brazenly at her perimeter. This is an impasse whose bud she thought she had nipped by aggravating her muscles into interlaced mounds so her body resembles a relief map of the Appalachians. In whose northernmost range this story unfolds & hence the much-delayed answer to item (a), above.        3.  Naked woman dadadadada police : not a story but words at the end of a chain whose first link is her realizing that the Puerto Rican kids across the lake splashing and whooping are not having fun  though this is the sign that she d stuck on their door. No, there s another word for the kid slapping his palms on the water: Drowning. Even the urinater abruptly stops his stream and stumbles back from her, ashamed. And because she s the one with the lifeguard build and because all the guys are much too drunk, without even thinking she finds herself paddling toward the spot these kids are now screaming Julio! at,Julio!  where she draws a mental X upon the water.X Of course, it is a fantasy, the correspondence that would make a drawing equal life, and so you understand how amazing it is, when she dives to the bottom and her hand happens on the child.        4. Perhaps what she expected was for the men on shore to pay her no mind, as in Manet s D jeuner . . . :D jeuner . . . : the naked woman sits among them, yet she is a ghost. But the kids keep yelling Julio! even afterJulio!  she s hauled the wet one out, the one she points to: Julio okay. No, they shriek,Julio okay. No, Julio otro! words she knows just enough SpanishJulio otro!  to know mean there s another Julio in the lake. Whom she cannot save despite her next round of diving, which lasts until the cops come hiking down the trail in their cop shoes. Then she comes ashore and stands shivering among them, telling the story calmly enough until she ends it with: for Christ s sake can t anyone give her a T-shirt? They re staring as if somehow she s what s to blame, seeing a naked woman, not the miracle. Which is, of course, the living boy, that with these words Julio otro!  Julio otro! we manage to make sense to anyone at all.  

  

Holy father I can t pretend I m not afraid to see you again but I ll say that when the time comes I believe my courage will expand like a sponge cowboy in water. My earth- father was far braver than me    coming to America he knew no English save Rolling Stones lyrics and how to say thanksthanks God. Will his goodness roll over to my tab and if yes, how soon? I m sorry for neglecting your myriad signs, which seem obvious now as a hawk s head on an empty plate. I keep waking up at the bottom of swimming pools, the water reflecting whatever I miss most: whiskey- glass, pill bottles, my mother s oleander, which was sweet and evergreen but toxic in all its parts. I know it was silly to keep what I kept from you; you ve always been so charmed by my weaknesses. I just figured you were becoming fed up with all your making, like a virtuoso trying not to smash apart her flute onstage. Plus, my sins were practically devotional: two peaches stolen from a bodega, which were so sweet I savored even the bits I flossed out my teeth. I know it s no excuse, but even thinking about them now I m drooling. Consider the night I spent reading another man s lover the DreamDream Songs in bed   we made it to  a green living / drops limply  before we were tangled into each other, cat still sleeping at our feet. Allow me these treasures, Lord. Time will break what doesn t bend   even time. Even you.

Each time we moved to a new apartment, and we did three times, I knew I shouldn't, that I should   leave while I had the chance, but each time we moved to a new apartment we were desperate,   had been kicked out or priced out and we only had one bed, no savings, just friends   some of whom knew that you fractured your hand punching through a wall, inches from my head,   and some of whom were aware that you threw things at me when I said things   you didn't like, as if my words were were  things I threw at you first. It made sense to you.   I can't remember the bad things I said my self-serving memory enraged   you, and why not: I always remembered the bad things you did.did.   And, yes, I do remember everything you threw: a chair   over our heads at a bar (Liz was there), a mirror like a frisbee aimed at my knees,   a carton of fried rice that splat on the shade of our only nice lamp, oil stains   patterned it with tiny bugs. Also, you threw me against a   wall, but you always said it was because I made you so mad because you loved me so much   and didn't want to lose me that you'd lose control instead and later   beg me to stay, that if I left you it meant you would never be loved and I couldn't   bear to have you think that about either one of us. I wasn't someone   who'd let herself be hit; I'd never take that from a man. A man would be a criminal   if he did what you did. But you had been hurt and all that   pain and anger needed more time, and I made you so crazy, I was so   stubborn and good at mean words, what else were you supposed to do?   You liked to raise your fist pretending to hit me and then half-smile when   I winced or cringed. It was important that you had never actually hit me,actually  never punched me   with a closed fist: you'd only grabbed me and choked me and flung me and made dents in the wall next to me,   and narrowly missed me, but we knew you meant to miss, never truly meant to clobber me   on the head with something heavy, something light, maybe, like a book I loved.   When a woman you love hits you on the head with a book you love, is that love?   I was so ashamed and afraid someone would find out about us, then I was afraid and ashamed   people already knew but didn't know what to do. Did I really think this was a secret?   Not from the cops we called during two bad fights or from Peggy who let you stay with her rent-free that month   I kicked you out. You two had a blast. But I couldn't pay the rent on my own,   so you moved back in, triumphant, Peggy still in love with you, and you gloated about   how much money you'd saved. Surrounded by friends, whom could I tell?   Why would I tell anyone who didn't already know us well enough to already know?   If everyone knew, none of us said so. We talked, all of us, almost constantly, intimately,   so how did we keep ourselves so quiet? You and I, together in this, were alone with this,   alone among women who loved us. The two of us never more alone than when together.  

He faked my death, set up this ranch far from my three daughters. Suburban hellhole. With bracelet on ankle, house- arrest. At noon the bully sun shoulders a ripe moon. In the dark soaps reign. The anchors will often flash their glitterati weddings. Not one daughter has birthed an heir. In vitro   be damned. I hose the lawn and count the cars like fish slipping their shiny chrome along asphalt. Which sparrow missed? Cordelia   my gutted heart.

The owner smiles as if she knows me and pulls out a chair. Beside the doorway a copper basin lies on its side. Nana Ross had one just like it, in the kitchen, behind the grocery shop. As a child I imagined my soul was that color and sanctifying grace was red, dripping rosary-like, a kind of divine sweat that smelt of frankincense, myrrh, milk and straw. By age nine I had committed a mortal sin, let Nicki Walshe touch me there and didn t tell, made a bad confession, took communion paper thin and white on my black-spotted tongue. Nana sprinkled us with holy water, gave me a blessed rosary from Lourdes, all blue and purple it was, but I lost it like I lost the library book, sins mounting up; the row over contraception with a priest in the confessional box in Stillorgan. Sister Anne, white musty face, those thin lips  How dare you, a girl, question holy men.  Lying bare-breasted in the long grass with Ciar n, drinking Guinness followed by Harvey Wallbangers, vomiting it all up on Pearse Street, a guy from Tuam holding my forehead. Walking away from my father s house, my marriage, my job, to dance barefoot in a circle of women who prayed with wrists, hips, feet and drums, bellies painted gold, Magdalene red. In the Duomo di Firenze the air stinks of old blood, paintings heavy with pigment and suffering. I rinse my mouth with the Signora s wine and that copper basin is only a basin, a thing.

iii Eye of the hurricane the Battery, the Hudson breached, millions of gallons of it north on West Street filling Brooklyn Battery Tunnel, overflowing into the World Trade Center site, East River, six-to-eight-foot wall of water on South, Front, Water, John, Fulton, Pearl, Brooklyn Bridge s woven cables lifted delicately in hurricane sky.iiiiii Perhaps I make too much of it, that time, Eldon Axle, brake plates dipped in some sort of liquid to protect them from dust, dirt, metal chips the grinding caused   that time, night shift, press-machine shop on Outer Drive, rolls of stainless steel put in, fixed up, because the work you do is around fire your cuticles burn if the mask s not on right.iiiiiiiii When the mind is clear, to hear the sound of a voice, of voices, shifts in the attitude of syllables pronounced. When the mind is clear, to see a Sunday, in August, Shrine of Our Lady of Consolation, Carey, Ohio, at a holy water font, a mother washes her six-year-old s fingers crushed in an accident so that they ll heal.iviviv So what percentage of Weasel Boy s DNA do you think is pure weasel? Tooth-twisted, Yeats s weasels, in  Nineteen Hundred and Nineteen,  fighting in a hole.vvv Conflated, the finance vectors, opaque cyber-surveillance, supranational cartels, in the corporate state s political-economic singularity the greatest number of children in United States history are, now, incarcerated, having been sentenced by law.vivivi A comic dimension to it, on this F train to One Hundred Sixty-Ninth Street in Queens? He doesn t want to disturb you, but, see, he was stabbed in the face with an ice pick, he lost his left eye    lid pried open with thumb and forefinger    here, look, he ll show you    a white-and-pink-colored iris.

Magic Wayne with flowers; Wanye West; Box-of-Tricks Wayne; Wayne sad on Facebook, proving he loves his daughter; the sporty Wayne   loves himself skinny; Bald Wayne, head like a rocking chair; Amy Waynehouse; Wayne the ironic; Fat Wayne   tits pushed beneath a Fred Perry Wayne; Wayne from near Slough; Ugly Wayne   the unlikely mess of his wife Wayne   canned laughter; Wayne who renamed another Wayne Fleabag; Track-suited Wayne   your hubcaps, his pockets; Home and A-Wayne; Randy Wayne; Wayne, fountains of him, every drop snug to someone s mum; Wayne, boyfriend of Stacey; Wayne-ker; Wayne the rap star, gold teeth, grime; Wayne the Superhero, Wayne the Cowboy; Dancing Wayne   in tights; It s-Wayning-Men; a cavalcade of Waynes fucking each other up in a Geoff Hattersley poem   in a pub, in Barnsley; Purple Wayne; Wayne s World Wayne; Wayne  Sleng Teng  Smith; A-Wayne in a Manger; all of them have stopped what they re doing, all of them divided in two rows and facing each other, all of them, arms raised, they are linking fingers, all of them: an architrave through which  I celebrate, marching like I am the bridegroom, grinning like I am the bride

the children of haiti are not mythological we are starving or eating salty cakes made of clay   because in 1804 we felled our former slave captors the graceless losers sunk vindictive yellow teeth into our forests     what was green is now dust and everyone knows trees unleash oxygen (another humble word for life)   they took off with our torn branches beheaded our future stuck our breath up on pikes for all the world to see   we are a living dead example of what happens to warriors who in lieu of fighting for white men's countries dare to fight for their own lives   during carnival we could care less about our bloated empty bellies where there are voices we are dancing   where there is vodou we are horses where there are drums we are possessed with joy and stubborn jamboree   but when the makeshift trumpet player runs out of rhythmic breath the only sound left is guts grumbling   and we sigh to remember that food and freedom are not free   is haiti really free if our babies die starving? if we cannot write our names read our rights keep our leaders in their seats?   can we be free? really? if our mothers are mud? if dead columbus keeps cursing us and nothing changes when we curse back   we are a proud resilient people though we return to dust daily salt gray clay with hot black tears savor snot cakes over suicide   we are hungry creative people sip bits of laughter when we are thirsty dance despite   this asthma called debt congesting legendarily liberated lungs

It struck them both as strange: although each pond and lake clear to the coast was locked in ice, no open water, the imperious wind kept pushing waterfowl inland. That nightinland.  a winter moon stood high and pierced the thin clouds  vapors so the boy could contemplate their emptiness inside. Relentless, the flocks flew westward. The border collie whimpered, putting his forepaws now on one sill, now another, as if some odd creature circled the house.                                                                                           This lifetime later, a man, he looks back on that stay at her farm, its details clear, their meanings still vague. His grandmother called it wrong as well, that the weather should be so frigid even in such a gale. As a rule this kind of cold needed calm. He sees the fire,   the dazzle of sparks when she loaded a log. What seemed most amiss was how the old woman s house no longer felt safe that visit. He wanted and did not want to know what the dog might know. He tried to picture the menace outdoors. He longed to shape it so that he might name it. And after these many miles to now, away from the ruby glow of the metal parlor stove, from that blue-eyed collie, from the woman he so admires and loves recalling that night; after so much time,                                                                                           he still believes that to name a thing is to tame it, or at least to feel less bewildered. Not Death, for instance, but The deaths of Al and Virginia, his parents.Death, The deaths of Al  Virginia,  Not the abstract legalism, Divorce, but The disappearanceDivorce, The disappearanceof my sweet wife Sarah, run off with that California lawyer.of my sweet wife Sarah, run off with that California lawyer.   Not simply Alone, but I have no children. Was that the wailAlone, I have no children.  of geese coming down the stovepipe? If so, it would be a marvel, but he knew it wasn t. The caterwaul from the barn was alarming, and more than it might have been had Grandma herself not startled  after which she put on her late large husband s threaded farming coveralls outside her housedress, which rode up and made a lumpy sash. She stepped out under cloud and bird. He would not follow. Rather, he stood                                                                                           indoors to wait until she came stomping her boots through puddled barnyard holes like a child herself, kicking ice shards to scuttle along like beads from a broken bracelet. No matter. The world had gone wrong, violent and void at once. She said, The mare has foaled. The mare has foaled.    On tiptoe, she read the mercury out the kitchen window, then told her shivering grandson, We ll call the new colt Zero.We ll call the new colt Zero.  


origin: No soul could have spoken of the universe s origin since no one could have existed to witness it. Origin is ellipsis. We believe the universe began, because we exist and because we can hear the sounds of its origin. Activating radio telescopes, gazing at the far corners of existence so dark and distant that the mewling universe can still be heard and seen cooling in cosmic antiquity, we hear. We hear the origin s cold weak light journey to us. From our center, we can see nothing beyond the cosmic background radiation s feeble crackle. Beyond this dark margin, we can hear no more origin. We have run out of the sound of the past. We have used up all our past we may know. Beyond this past, there is only the silence that marks the edge of the infinite. When we deploy a fantasy such as  The West,  what we often mean is specifically that transatlantic network of capitalism that formed our experience of modernity, the economic system that catalyzed the Industrial Revolution and the rise of the British and American orders. The West in this sense possessed its own Big Bang, its own founding from sublime trauma: the expropriation of land from those who lived in the New World and the expropriation of body and labor from those who lived on the African west coast, and the plunder that laid waste to peoples and nations of three continents. And here are also sublime silences. The silent images of the Aztecs  death, which Jos  Rabasa shows were painted by an artist asked to document their own world s demise by the Spanish. The silence of the encomienda, blazing silence of Diego de Landa, crackling light of Maya codices and icons arsoned and non-silence of confessions, screams elicited from those he hoisted into air by their wrists and he pelted hot wax at them and he lashed their bodies with whips and they grew non-silent and then silent. And so a continent bared for those moaning boats that stole across ocean stole people across continent crammed in dark belly of ships, these captured people of many tongues who could not speak to each other and who we struck in the lungs with death by drowning people who we abducted to our country people we commanded not to read or write or speak. Such events suggest other silences: first, the silence against appropriation (How can one speak of a suffering that is not one s own, a suffering whose responsibility one might also own?) and second, the silence of sublime inadequacy (How can one write poetry after the killing of three continents?). One can lodge many answers to these questions, the first of them being
 origin
moratorium: When early evening came, the Stars descended into the parking lot of the 7-11 where they held congress and declared embargo on speaking of the dead. And dawn came and what we had said about him became sky-silent.dark matter: Because my father had died into an object, I fled my work, my friends, my art, New York. I fled my life so I could also become object. Youmna followed, but these memories are fictional (performance) and so we will drape her with a white cloth. Having fled my life, I am sitting on my bed, operating this memory indoors, underground, in basements, in locked bedrooms, in any indoor container that might further package me away from the fact and still did they pursue, still did they strike the darting arrows of the Death Star, that black radiance of leeches that flung itself down from the hot surfaces of the griefsun. The famishing lines tracked me inside, tracked me around corners, lassoing me into the air.  Where does this black sun come from?  Julia Kristeva asked.  Out of what eerie galaxy do its invisible, lethargic rays reach me, pinning me down to the ground, to my bed, compelling me to silence, to renunciation?  And this is when Youmna lifted the sheet that had been cast over my body.  Why did you cover yourself like this, like an object at the morgue? What were you thinking? 
I said,  I thought what I had covered was the world. the unsayable: One of the traditional paradoxes of the dead is how they do not emit information. Because the dead do not emit light, which cannot escape the event horizon of the deceased, they can only be detected by the symptoms they leave on the surrounding matter, the haloed matter burning at their corona, the white marks scarring the X-rays. A person can survive within the dead once it has gravitationally collapsed. This happens for only a second from the observer s eye, but, because of gravitational time dilation, grief  occurs a nearly infinitely long time for the person who chooses to live inside the dead.tlacuilo, graphic novelist at the world s end: In those California days after my dad died, I felt the life began to seep out of me into the ground and so I brought my sneakers to the cobbler for resoling, which strangely enough did not mitigate my newfound grief. Sometimes I would find myself gazing out the window at the garden my mom cultivated behind her house, often while performing an Edwardian pose of wan melancholy, and as I approached, the glass would immediately darken as though saturated with an egglike blue shadow. (I later realized this shadow was caused by my head blocking the lamplight and decided to simply lean back.) I found myself stricken with headaches for some reason when I neglected to eat for days. I began laying my head on the carpet as though listening for footsteps, which I did often in those days, perhaps I believed the sun would itself walk inside and incite me, when I saw a woman in my mother s backyard. I did not recognize her.
She crouched on the ground holding what I thought was a knife.  I thought I saw her carving the earth into sections. As I came closer,  I saw that what she grasped in her hand was a quill, though she held it with such authority that she looked as though she held the earth by its handle. All the cracks that scrawled between the grass I saw that these were not cracks. They were sketches. And what a strange thing, looking back on it, how I never wondered what this woman was doing in my mother s backyard. She glanced up at me as I approached and said,  Everyone I know is dead. I am also dead, but someone must stay behind and document my death. I am the only archivist, so I remain suspended between death and history. 
I realized what was occurring and asked, selfishly,  So it s possible to talk to someone who is dead? 
 You do it all the time. It s like what Youmna told you to write into your eulogy. 
 Yeah, okay.  I paused.  But he never remembers to talk back to me. 
She took out two cubes, possibly carved from bone, and threw them at my feet.  What s that for?  I kneeled closer to her.  Is this fortune telling? 
 It s your stats and hit points. 
I laughed.  You re sending me into a dungeon? 
 No,  she said.  You are going on a pilgrimage. A pilgrimage to hell. initiation: To prepare for your descent (for there was no question of which direction you would eventually end up), you began your initiation into three domains of sorcery: the silent vows of grief; the generative magics obtained through meditation upon the colonial archive; and apprenticeship into all manner of low-level  magics, including wonder-making, liberating demons, clairvoyance of the past, fierce activities, special jumping abilities, control over the three worlds, abridgment of one s own lifespan through nicotine inhalation, research methods, the augmentation of merit and pleasure by generating poetry using your body, red optic blasts, melancholy of the spleen, a frequent customer stamp card for Woorijip Korean deli. Your first prophesied guru was the Tlacuilo, the woman historian who had ventured to the underworld by standing witness at the end of the Mexica and the cosmogony of the New World. She had painted omens of the future that now served you as diagrams of the past: the two-headed man who presented his body to Moctezuma, the comet whose banner waved across the sky and heralded the origin of the next kingdom, and the pale ghosts in steel skins who came as gods and guests, the ghosts who at the Festival of  Toxcatl came to kill us. One of them sawed off a man s head, another speared the eye of a warrior who was betrothed to your sister. The Tlacuilo led you to the black lake that Mexico City had become. You did not know if you were in a fantasy or the past. You were in a fantasy and the past. Small skiffs wobbled by, as did wounded bodies that dyed the waters red. Surrounded by corpses levitating upon the waters, she taught you the first sorcery, that of death s erasure. She cut off the hole of your mouth so you could say nothing, nothing commensurate with death, nothing can be commensurate to that dark infinity, and so you lost no breaths and so you followed her from the shores (sores) and the waterline slowly became the horizon line of the sky and you could breathe. White fish flew by, gliding without effort. You looked one in the eye and it sucked its cow lips silently at you. She said that this was Atlantis or one of many Atlantises and you saw yourself walking beside her on a road towards an underwater city that you could see only as a speck in the far distance. You tripped on the body of a dead man, seemingly Chinese, his body weighed down with rock-filled bags. The Tlacuilo, who by this time walked far in front of you, came back and told you this man s name but asked you to stay silent. She led you about a mile further down the road towards the first station set aside for pilgrims such as yourself. Here she transmitted another teaching. There will also be other ages after this one, she said. Other suns will rise and fall. I will instruct you towards the attainment of a new title: The Cowerer from the Sun. She taught you how to crawl on the seabed, a weeping hog crawling on hands and knees. My final teaching is this: Go in fear of the sun. Having said this, she set her own body down in a fetal position and waited for the seaweed to smother her.liberating the sun demon spell:
Moneyed sun of vampiric Western powersmoratoriumdark matterthe unsayabletlacuilo, graphic novelist at the world s endinitiationliberating the sun demon spellquandary spellmiddle fantasy flight of passage
Poor souls, they perished.Had I been any god of power, I wouldHave sunk the sea within the earth
Poor souls, they perished.Poor souls, they perished.Had I been any god of power, I wouldHad I been any god of power, I wouldHave sunk the sea within the earthHave sunk the sea within the earthEngraving by Gustave Dor  for the Divine Comedy by Dante Alighieri.Divine Comedy
influence: If influence spoken by Spenser portends the star s fateful persuasion, flowing and fluctuating, does influenza mean the disease of fate?influenceinfluenceinfluenza
the stars: Migrant to death s second nation, Dante / emerges into the purging state and gazes up / at a supernal cross: four stars joyous, / isomorphs to the four cardinal virtues.  Dante is no bookkeeper of the literal ... [The] constellations are best taken as allegorical.  Although one of the largest star radii observed belongs to the glowering red hypergiant VY Canis Majoris, that terrible and sublime throne whose dominion could swallow our own sun nine billion times, poor yellow pebble celestial, and whose own death slain by nova during that final day shall illumine our infinite interior caverns of night   we might also regard Canis Majoris s gigantism as hypothetical: though massive, this hypergiant is a thousand times more diffuse than air. The size of this terrorful star depends on what words we wield to define its stellar radius (e.g., whether by density or optical-depth). You can shrink the most sublime of stars using only your language. Vaporware star, luminosity leached of borders, you are all fictions.the starsVaporware star, luminosity leached of borders, you are all fictions
human song: Perhaps it is the case that you never get over things. You decide you will no longer engage with them. You answer with  silence until you are reminded once again of the wound and requested  to be human.human songpoem written after slingshotting around the sun to the future when you too are a father

 Echo of the clocktower, footstep in the alleyway, sweep of the wind sifting the leaves. Jeweller of the spiderweb, connoisseur of autumn's opulence, blade of lightning harvesting the sky. Keeper of the small gate, choreographer of entrances and exits, midnight whisper traveling the wires. Seducer, healer, deity or thief, I will see you soon enough  in the shadow of the rainfall, in the brief violet darkening a sunset  but until then I pray watch over him as a mountain guards its covert ore and the harsh falcon its flightless young.

If your house is a dress it ll fit like Los Angeles red sun burning west, deserts, fields, for certain it will drape even a boy no less boy in disrepair wandering from shore to crest, others mistake his searching for despair, no, never, but for thirst, cloaked as he is, warm, radiant in a house dress.

You are a seahorse unraveling. You are the back of a landhorse looking backward. Gotten away form have you thrown yourself racing. Who took what was not out of thunderous shade In an all-knowing sycamore's branches. What who do you make of stone steps you stepped through. You took the boat onto flattened waters. White wall of blue morning fog to slip into. You withstood what is was that was wailing you through. There you were standing on nothing, looking down at two Blackfeathered slashes your two hands held on to. Off were you going aloft would birds such as these take You. Who leaned you and stood you and shook you and shook you.  

Shakespeare understood the blues. He knew parting was such sweet sorrow. Mr. Shakespeare was the main MC Of the Elizabethan scene and so I figure To be or not to be (similar to how you be?) Be as timeless as hell and as universal Since such questions never go out of style. I only wish Othello had sussed out Iago And taken Iago down to the crossroads And asked Iago the devil s true-true name. Juliet is like Lady Gaga (in my HBO rewrite) And Romeo lives in Harlem with his moms   Though that s only his nom-de-plume. He wants to be the first rapper with a PhD. And Robert Burns smiles to keep from crying And when he penned the best-made plans Of mice and men (not rats) often go astray What he really meant was shit happens. Dead Old White Men they knew the blues Though they didn t always know what They knew okay maybe not even in 1619 By which time Shakespeare was Auld Lang Syne and Burns was not yet in this world But the blues isn t stuck on color or CP time.

Time was away and somewhere else, There were two glasses and two chairs And two people with the one pulse (Somebody stopped the moving stairs): Time was away and somewhere else. And they were neither up nor down; The stream s music did not stop Flowing through heather, limpid brown, Although they sat in a coffee shop And they were neither up nor down. The bell was silent in the air Holding its inverted poise  Between the clang and clang a flower, A brazen calyx of no noise: The bell was silent in the air. The camels crossed the miles of sand That stretched around the cups and plates; The desert was their own, they planned To portion out the stars and dates: The camels crossed the miles of sand. Time was away and somewhere else. The waiter did not come, the clock Forgot them and the radio waltz Came out like water from a rock: Time was away and somewhere else. Her fingers flicked away the ash That bloomed again in tropic trees: Not caring if the markets crash When they had forests such as these, Her fingers flicked away the ash. God or whatever means the Good Be praised that time can stop like this, That what the heart has understood Can verify in the body s peace God or whatever means the Good. Time was away and she was here And life no longer what it was, The bell was silent in the air And all the room one glow because Time was away and she was here.  

Go north a dozen years on a road overgrown with vines to find the days after you were born. Flowers remembered their colors and trees were frothy and the hospital was behind us now, its brick indifference forgotten by our car mirrors. You were revealed to me: tiny, delicate, your head smelling of some other world. Turn right after the circular room where I kept my books and right again past the crib where you did not sleep and you will find the window where I held you that June morning when you opened your eyes. They were blue, tentative, not the deep chocolate they would later become. You were gazing into the world: at our walls, my red cup, my sleepless hair and though I'm told you could not focus, and you no longer remember, we were seeing one another after seasons of darkness.

O slow. O so low solo. Indigo lasso. Pell-mell the palomino snow falls in a disheveled manner.

You swear the twin spirits taught you to write. At night, you climbed the leaves to hear the gods. Catch in the throat. Hollow breath.       Paj is not pam is not pab.       Pajpampab     Blossom is not blanket is not help.           Ntug is not ntuj is not ntub.           Ntugntujntub         Edge is not sky is not wet. On sheet of bamboo with indigo branch.       To txiav is not the txias.txiavtxias            To scissor is not the cold. The obsidian mask will make its own sleep, leave behind the silver your body won t shed. Now you are Niam NtawvNiam Ntawv who was once a young farmer scrawling in secret toward the triggering day. When they could take no more, when all that you had was given, you lined your grave with paper.

It considers those men that ambled & Flushed their swords & cut off the neck Of the blue horses & scraped off death Dust from the carcass   rape of women Tresses in boilers   the tin-colored animals On the viridian grasses in particular the Howler Monkey let the word shoot up To the spheres   later we charged our Blood with these accounts we hid the arms Unforgiving texts & designs sewn into Our tiny alabaster lockets. We visited The last ridge where Victor Jara Denounced the paramilitary   from La Obrera in the heights of  Tijuana we Sketched the reddish moon & scratched Poems those things that could carry The letters we hauled on our backs. We were separated from something we Could not describe yet we were in The totality in the long winding turquoise That broke us & put us back together Again. What was that totality? It could Not be written   Green moon, green blood   Green moon, green blood We wrote. We marched to the ends of Lacanj  Chansayab & the heights Of El Color n Central M xico. We were too Late   the waters in which people bathed Were cloudy & malignant   bellies Bloated children leaned on the twig House women stood up some sat cross- Legged under the fire rays of noon    We knew they knew the rubble land Was not theirs or ours it was stuffed into The cigarette packs of the Ladino Hacendados who kicked up their short Boots in the City of Bones below. With our faces in new faces we rolled Back to LA. Do you change it? Do you Leave it the same? Words   what are they? A new cognition was required   then With the ecstasy of the unleashed Other things pulled us apart. Other things Reassembled us. Now we are here.

I worry much about the suffering of Machado. I was only one when he carried his mother across the border from Spain to France in a rainstorm. She died and so did he a few days later in a rooming house along a dry canal. To carry Mother he abandoned a satchel holding his last few years of poetry. IVe traveled to Collioure several times to search for Machado's lost satchel. The French fed him but couldn't save him. There's no true path to a death   we discover the path by walking. We turn a corner on no road and there's a house on a green hill with a thousand colorful birds sweeping in a circle. Are the poems in the basement of the house on the hill? We'll find out if we remember earth at all.

I woke from a bird hitting the window, almost, I thought, hard enough to break it.                                    The sun rose knowingly.                                                                                  I slid the sash up and stuck my head out like someone in an Italian movie.                                                                                                  A flicker lay on its back stunned but it was blinking steady as a railroad crossing.                  Was there misery to put out?                                                                       Would it come to its "senses"?                   I thought where were you when bark beetles killed half my trees?                  Then I remembered, sleepily, reading that flickers mostly eat ants.                 I went back to sleep for half an hour, and dreamed, as I often do, of horses.                                    When next I looked, the bird still lay still, still blinking.                 Maybe, I thought, it can't roll over.                                                                                 So I went down and rolled it over.                          Terrified by my touch, it came to life and flop- hopped down the hill into some sagebrush.                                                                                It didn't fly, but it didn't seem broken, either.                                                   I tried to find it later.                                                                                           No luck.                                                                                                           Whether it lived and flew off, or died thrust into a bush, was, apparently, none of my business.                                        If it were thrust into a bush, I knew the ants wouldn't wait for the guest of honor to start dinner.  





Apart disclaimed wicked pea, split soft skin of the principle princess, who writhes, a little blood passes her perineum every night, grey linen sheets flax talisman plot luxe to strip and scrub all gore a plain bar of secret white soap it is a pine tree, it is an orange blossom, is it a rose hip under a baby tongue, blood cuts punisher, swear it closed, closes it  

Long, too long America, Traveling roads all even and peaceful you learn'd from joys and prosperity only, But now, ah now, to learn from crises of anguish, advancing, grappling with direst fate and recoiling not, And now to conceive and show to the world what your children en-masse really are, (For who except myself has yet conceiv'd what your children en-masse really are?)

iiMarionette means little Mary. Think of Mary Shelley, a jointed doll lifted from her mother s unstitched interior, that fist-shaped hole, the future mother of three dead children and Frankenstein s monstrous electric baby, hater of creators. Think of all the porn-dollies moving their mouths up and down on wood and the way the men jerk, responding as they re made to, and the clear wires. The men who make up cyborgs, beautiful and silver-skulled with wet mouths that might deliver quick blue shocks. Think of Eve s small teeth kinking apple flesh and who put it there and who suggested and who lifted her wrist. Think of shadow puppets with enormous penises. Think of little boys shot for holding up toy guns. Think of animals compared to puppets by Aristotle   how levers are released and strike the twisted sinews against one another. Think of people compared to animals. Think of men on a bus forcing instruments so far inside a girl they puppet the girl to death and puppet means pulled by tendons. Think of if you re happy and you know it clap your hands. Think of the grace of a marionette as it glances the earth, as its limbs shake and float. Think of how its mind is elsewhere.iiii

buildings blend into the sky     the work goes on from where we left off and consciousness, by rights, is doors and windows a spritz of color in this life is what we can expect if we can expect anything and a breeze or two a quiet day     a little sun that 5-letter word "money" relying on no one for pleasure than the weather and the then discovered leisure to lean a little into more than can be expected let me explain we feel the heart against the ribs we feel the leg against the chair we feel two eyes linked as one looking into your two and rubbing your brow like a finger taking the sweat lengthwise off the brow and drying the forehead which is suddenly your we feel the nouns make emotions out of a sense of easiness the ability to relax the desire to simplify what we suddenly discover is meant because we haven't paid attention to exemplify something what it is, we forget we know it was something special something out of the ordinary a nagging something or other stupidly repeating itself in a vague way on the sill when we think the water still that's the silliest thing I ever heard of hearing everything through the air conditioner above the bottom line

One tenseless moment liquifies to be lost into the stream of static's gray light. A lapse develops him the tape but reveals the reels degaussed, emptied of ghosts. He sifts through the tissue of noise for accusative objects he could once recall as the magnetic arrows of the tape seethe out from their mound to forage. His perfect past a glacier's gray retreat looped back out of phase with itself. It's low-decibel hiss resonates in throbbing waves that mimic the present seen from behind. This present bends into an empty crease where the next phoneme fails to arrive. There, books helped him recover the echo and filter on a model of speech that crashed into twelve thousand darts roaming the field her face turns in shadow. Her face it blurs with gauzy silt of words that used to comprehend her. Their river spools through an oxbow bend above a bird's black wings smooth air.  

i early morning i early morningi early morning The rain, gray god with its huge hands has shredded the roses, and clapping, kept us up all night, the bridge washed out, the troll waiting to gobble a goat. How long has he been there, wet and cold,impatient, starving, his coatimpatient, starving, his coat rent with welts and matted with mist?Father, thundering, his voice fullFather, thundering, his voice full of  bracken and leaves, leaves that in the autumn clogged the gutters. WhoWho goes over the bridge? Who goes there?        the billy goats stammering, pawing the air. But I am the goat and the troll and so cannot pass nor grant passage.   ii iiii The high meadow filled with sweet grass! The spindle puts the moon to bed, the window latched, the sheets pulled tight, pincushion star, ram butting his head, my brother and sister behind and ahead   his sister was no use to him either,    she took what was his, cat s cradle    she took what was his, cat s cradle bridge made of sharp goat s thread. Who goes there now, over the rickety bridge? Tiny steps, lickety-split, my place is in the pause betweenthe thunder and the bridge, Fatherthe thunder and the bridge, Father shouting over the torn white water,    hoofprints mark the place last seen.iii at the museum (bellows) For Alexander Nemerov iii at the museum (bellows)iii at the museum (bellows)For Alexander NemerovFor Alexander Nemerov       The man in the left-hand corner of Bellows s picture of the Dempsey-Firpo fight, the picture a dream, so not a real fight   a picture of a fight   his flayed hide just visible under his blue pinstripes, the watcher and the fighterindistinguishable, one insideindistinguishable, one inside the other, lion and lion tamer, the paint daubs faces or fingerprints and the lights staring and staring acrossthe fretwork of the ring, and Bellowsthe fretwork of the ring, and Bellows himself, next to him, looking surprised, as if to be there was to give himself up without our noticing it, as we all do   in a gesture, or word, leaving something behind we should have taken with usor even guarded, a way of not lettingor even guarded, a way of not letting something be over and done with. The fight was over in four minutes flat. A curious thing about the painting is that Bellows chose to show us   the moment when Firpo sent Dempsey careening, with a blow to the jaw, one of the two times he laid him out, and we, with the spectators crammedinto the foreground of the pictureinto the foreground of the picture have to help push Dempsey back into the ring where two-and-a-half   minutes later he will defeat Firpo, who went down four times to his two. In Assisi, at the Basilica di San Francesco,in the panel in which Giotto depictsin the panel in which Giotto depicts the moment Francis gives away his worldly goods, the palm that Francis raises up to the hand that is reaching   down to him from heaven, a hand out of the blue, open, ready to give or receive wonders, is the same hand in Bellows s picture raised behind Dempseyone wing of a dove, the impulse isone wing of a dove, the impulse is to press our own palms to it, and despite our better judgment to hurl him back.   iv blackbirds iv blackbirdsiv blackbirds A song that Father liked to sing:      a dozen blackbirds baked alive but still alive when they did bring     the pie to set before the king       what a flurry when the pie was cut!        The birds cawed madly as they rose   blackbirds flapping blackened wings     who circled back to snip your nose!          I see the moon, the moon sees me, shining on the apple tree ...don t sit under the apple treedon t sit under the apple tree with anyone else but me  no no, with anyone else but me ...no no, with anyone else but me ... sound of hurry, over the bridge.   v at the museum (wyeth) v at the museum (wyeth)v at the museum (wyeth)As always, we want something from the dead,As always, we want something from the dead, even the blackbird, stiff in a kind of grassy net,its black leather gangster feet curled upits black leather gangster feet curled up as if holding on to something it let go  and beyond, to the right, inevitably, a house  and beyond, to the right, inevitably, a house   black-shuttered with its high gray wing,its bones buried deep in the earth like a beastits bones buried deep in the earth like a beast that once took flight, bones with the imprintof feathers, that print repeated in the far away treesof feathers, that print repeated in the far away trees on a rise to the left of the house, a good distanceaway, as if the trees had been painted by pressingaway, as if the trees had been painted by pressing a painted leaf to the canvas, the spinethe tablature of a feather, or fish, the scalesthe tablature of a feather, or fish, the scales clearly marked in miniature, although we knowthe trees are much bigger than the blackbirdthe trees are much bigger than the blackbird so stock-still in the spiky grass, so lately landed,its glossy mourning coat spit-shined. Underits glossy mourning coat spit-shined. Under those trees, a short distance from the houseas nowhere else in the picture, a momentas nowhere else in the picture, a moment of repose, the sun on the warm bark, the circleof cool beneath. But the bird holds us fast,of cool beneath. But the bird holds us fast, a shadow cast by moonlight, the flowersbeside it articulate as the delphiniumsbeside it articulate as the delphiniums in La Primavera, at the Uffizi, at which wepaused until we could look no longer atpaused until we could look no longer at an extreme propensity for beauty, as though itmight explode in smithereens. Autumn,might explode in smithereens. Autumn, the seed pods are moth-eaten moons, dry, rattling.In Wyeth s more famous picture, the girlIn Wyeth s more famous picture, the girl stranded in the foreground in a clutch of weedsher awkward limbs stretching in the hissing grassher awkward limbs stretching in the hissing grass is in the same place in the picture planeas the blackbird, we all agreed with this,as the blackbird, we all agreed with this, the woman in the white hat   why a hat,inside the museum   and her friend, smaller,inside the museum   and her friend, smaller, dressed all in black, black shoes, black stockings,black dress, although it is summer.black dress, although it is summer. At once we want to help her as she reachesthe unbridgeable distance of the fieldthe unbridgeable distance of the field and the meadow filled with rough grassalthough it s not so evident how to help heralthough it s not so evident how to help her for even now our heavy limbs twitch withenchantment, caught in a dream in whichenchantment, caught in a dream in which it is impossible to move except by slithering.In my sleep you said I said   too many people.In my sleep you said I said   too many people.too many people The black house is a ship on the horizon,every light on, or the moon that looksevery light on, or the moon that looks as if it is following us but from whichwe are always veering away, the white wolfwe are always veering away, the white wolf snapping at our heels, goading us to crossthe bridge or waiting for us by the waterthe bridge or waiting for us by the water its white face wavering under the pilings.The girl is a blackbird in the high grass,The girl is a blackbird in the high grass, it is natural to mistake one for the other when it is so difficult despite the painter s efforts, herculean, really, to see clearly       vi saturday night (at the ballet) vi saturday night (at the ballet)vi saturday night (at the ballet)        Puck, above a game of flashlight tag        Puck, above a game of flashlight tag the tiniest fairy pirouetting like a dervish   the honeysuckle wood alit, one pointed green-shod foot dangling, like the hand that reached down to Francis to pull him up to heaven or rebuke him, or the white hand coming out of the darkness over the ring: countingone, two, three, alley, alley, innisfree  one, two, three, alley, alley, innisfree the three goats balking at the bridge, Father bellowing over the rushing water the river loud, rearing its head, foam rushing past its eyes and ears, Father clamoring, needing something   the moment we knowit has come to nothing.it has come to nothing.     vii (the dream) vii (the dream)vii (the dream)The heavens shift.The heavens shift. And presto! the tilted abacus of stars slides back in place, twilight s worn edge rubbed to a sheen. Queen, ass, Indian child, love-lit quartet, slipping    as the constellations dobehind Gaia s unearthly tiltbehind Gaia s unearthly tilt    leaving us in night s cooler, less demanding airwhere our taxi driver has his phonewhere our taxi driver has his phone on speaker: twenty minutes of harangue,     a hornet trapped inside a troika, the driversilent except once to say,silent except once to say,    interrupting the ceaseless string of epithets, You are the women of my dreams.  You are the women of my dreams.             Lights turn from red to green, the avenue slick before the curb. Remember? The crescent moon scar on my knee              Rain patters the windshield, the lights     from the bodega spatter lime and pink.              A folded scene.Above, the moon  Above, the moon                another night before a halt.   viii evening and morning viii evening and morningviii evening and morningMorning lit by evening s lantern, the catMorning lit by evening s lantern, the cat a baby falling from the broken bough, childhood s terrible litter of fear.I am the goat and the goat is me. I see the moon,I am the goat and the goat is me. I see the moonthe moon sees me. And if I die before I wake,the moon sees me the spirit leaving the body as we sleep as Giacomo said in the gospel   who said it, where? if the spirit leaves my body where does it go?   and in the dark the pine knots watching and your eyes big in the dark, and the sound of breathing. In your sleep you said too many people.too many people I woke you in the dark and I took you by the hand   How far is the moon? If I folded this piece of paper? But then you would never get there, remember? And your total disregard of me   twilight s rainbow a lasso fetching the moon from the water   When I was walking I fell from the curb. You did not. I did, I did. I did, I did       ix the cove ix the coveix the cove The three children not far off cross the road to the water and into the hot high grass, their feet light on the flattened stalks of the cattails that line the swale like pale raffia woven expressly for that   purpose, as if the landscape was a diorama made of glassine, straw, and folded paper. Whose children are they   one, two, three, walking to the ruined, silvery, splintery boat, that looks like a whale come   ashore in the pocket cove which opens at high tide like a giantess s compact? There is another smaller shadow, pulling a kite   or no, a pull-toy dog, which barks at an upturned horseshoe crab   and a stained, eyeless, gray-brown gull. How oddly sound travels over water. Underfoot the sun-crazed hermit crabs run helter-skelter to their bomb shelters under the wet sand, where at dead low tide the marsh   makes a kind of long, humped bridge of itself to the rapt cove and the ruined quiet. Psst saysPsst the wind. The children run at it, lowing their heads, making horns with their fingers, bashing themselves in it and through it.   x case sensitive x case sensitivex case sensitive Two days I ve forgotten where I m going, New York s crossword up and down a litter of numbers and letters. I spin on the grid, round hole in a square peg, each step a rope bridge hung in air, my tongue a troll who eats my words, my goat-fur cloak held fast by Pysche s brooch.  Smile, libling, you have your whole lifelibling ahead of you.  Hold on tight. Even the deadHold on tight won t speak to me, my sharp hooves beating the bank s slick grass, the bog oak s muddy rune. Bee disheveled on the stairs, the storm rattling the panes.  I dreamed I walked and walked I dreamed I walked and walkedand could not find my way.  Dear God, let meand could not find my way keep my dreams to myself and do no harm.

The maggot dreams of the ear and the wound, that welcome dark between gauze and knee, cheek and skull, and any open moment in the body that will have it. The child- fly wants a mouth to grow into, a burn to salve, a heart to feed on. It calls for sugar and Job and marrow. The maggot loves St. Lazarus, though he walked away, loves the warm cutbanks of the chest. When the maggot asks for wings, we will answer with painted hands, eyes beneath coins, a promise of graves.

Valentine's palette is mostly grey. Next comes blue (borage, cobalt, silk, robe, egg). Then white. Some inherent greens. But she draws most often from the greyer end of the grey scale. It could be manifest in a postmortem jaw, dusty glass, a sky, one degree Fahrenheit, a lone sock under a sickbed; the water is grey, and the long wall where one exits a car. Grey is the intermediate state she inhabits with no apparent effort. In the grey space, the bardo, the spirit starts to find shape, to find internal structure.

1 I always wonder what they think the niggers are doing while they, the pink and alabaster pragmatists,  are containing  Russia   and defining and re-defining and re-aligning  China,  nobly restraining themselves, meanwhile, from blowing up that earth which they have already  blasphemed into dung:  the gentle, wide-eyed, cheerful ladies, and their men, nostalgic for the noble cause of Vietnam, nostalgic for noble causes, aching, nobly, to wade through the blood of savages  ah ! Uncas shall never leave the reservation,  except to purchase whisky at the State Liquor Store. The Panama Canal shall remain forever locked:  there is a way around every treaty. We will turn the tides of the restless Caribbean,  the sun will rise, and set on our hotel balconies as we see fit. The natives will have nothing to complain about, indeed, they will begin to be grateful, will be better off than ever before.  They will learn to defer gratification and save up for things, like we do. Oh, yes. They will.Oh, yes. They will.We have only to make an offerWe have only to make an offerthey cannot refuse.they cannot refuse. This flag has been planted on the moon: it will be interesting to see  what steps the moon will take to be revenged  for this quite breathtaking presumption. This people masturbate in winding sheets.  They have hacked their children to pieces.  They have never honoured a single treaty  made with anyone, anywhere. The walls of their cities are as foul as their children. No wonder their children come at them with knives. Mad Charlie man's son was one of their children,  had got his shit together by the time he left kindergarten, and, as for Patty, heiress of all the ages, she had the greatest vacation of any heiress, anywhere:Golly-gee, whillikens, Mom, real guns!Golly-gee, whillikens, Mom, real guns!and they come with a real big, black funky stud, too: and they come with a real big, black funky stud, too: oh, Ma! he's making eyes at me!oh, Ma! he's making eyes at me! Oh, noble Duke Wayne,  be careful in them happy hunting grounds. They say the only good Indian  is a dead Indian, by what I say is,  you can't be too careful, you hear? Oh, towering Ronnie Reagan, wise and resigned lover of redwoods,  deeply beloved, winning man-child of the yearning Republic from diaper to football field to Warner Brothers sound-stages, be thou our grinning, gently phallic, Big Boy of all the ages!    Salt peanuts, salt peanuts, for dear hearts and gentle people,  and cheerful, shining, simple Uncle Sam!   Nigger, read this and run! Now, if you can't read,  run anyhow!   From Manifest Destiny (Cortez, and all his men silent upon a peak in Darien) to A Decent Interval, and the chopper rises above Saigon, abandoning the noble cause and the people we have made ignoble and whom we leave there, now, to die,  one moves, With All Deliberate Speed, to the South China Sea, and beyond,  where millions of new niggers await glad tidings!    No, said the Great Man's Lady, I'm against abortion, I always feel that's killing somebody. Well, what about capital punishment? I think the death penalty helps.   That's right. Up to our ass in niggers on Death Row.   Oh, Susanna, don't you cry for me!     2 Well, I guess what the niggers  is supposed to be doing is putting themselves in the path  of that old sweet chariot and have it swing down and carry us home.   That would help, as they say, and they got ways of sort of nudging the chariot. They still got influence with Wind and Water, though they in for some surprises with Cloud and Fire.   My days are not their days. My ways are not their ways. I would not think of them, one way or the other, did not they so grotesquely block the view between me and my brother.   And, so, I always wonder: can blindness be desired? Then, what must the blinded eyes have seen to wish to see no more!   For, I have seen,  in the eyes regarding me,  or regarding my brother,  have seen, deep in the farthest valley of the eye, have seen a flame leap up, then flicker and go out, have seen a veil come down, leaving myself, and the other, alone in that cave which every soul remembers, and out of which, desperately afraid,  I turn, turn, stagger, stumble out,  into the healing air, fall flat on the healing ground,  singing praises, counselling my heart, my soul, to praise.   What is it that this people cannot forget?   Surely, they cannot be deluded as to imagine that their crimes are original?   There is nothing in the least original about the fiery tongs to the eyeballs, the sex torn from the socket, the infant ripped from the womb,  the brains dashed out against rock, nothing original about Judas, or Peter, or you or me: nothing: we are liars and cowards all, or nearly all, or nearly all the time: for we also ride the lightning, answer the thunder, penetrate whirlwinds, curl up on the floor of the sun, and pick our teeth with thunderbolts.   Then, perhaps they imagine that their crimes are not crimes?    Perhaps. Perhaps that is why they cannot repent,  why there is no possibility of repentance. Manifest Destiny is a hymn to madness,  feeding on itself, ending (when it ends) in madness:  the action is blindness and pain, pain bringing a torpor so deep  that every act is willed, is desperately forced, is willed to be a blow:  the hand becomes a fist, the prick becomes a club,  the womb a dangerous swamp, the hope, and fear, of love is acid in the marrow of the bone.  No, their fire is not quenched,  nor can be: the oil feeding the flames being the unadmitted terror of the wrath of God.    Yes. But let us put it in another,  less theological way:  though theology has absolutely nothing to do  with what I am trying to say. But the moment God is mentioned theology is summoned to buttress or demolish belief: an exercise which renders belief irrelevant and adds to the despair of Fifth Avenue  on any afternoon,  the people moving, homeless, through the city, praying to find sanctuary before the sky  and the towers come tumbling down,  before the earth opens, as it does in Superman. They know that no one will appear to turn back time,  they know it, just as they know that the earth has opened before  and will open again, just as they know that their empire is falling, is doomed, nothing can hold it up, nothing. We are not talking about belief.    3   I wonder how they think  the niggers made, make it,  how come the niggers are still here.  But, then, again, I don't think they dare to think of that: no:  I'm fairly certain they don't think of that at all.   Lord,  I with the alabaster lady of the house,  with Beulah. Beulah about sixty, built in four-square,  biceps like Mohammed Ali, she at the stove, fixing biscuits,  scrambling eggs and bacon, fixing coffee,  pouring juice, and the lady of the house, she say, she don't know how  she'd get along without Beulah and Beulah just silently grunts, I reckon you don't, and keeps on keeping on and the lady of the house say She's just like one of the family, and Beulah turns, gives me a look,  sucks her teeth and rolls her eyes in the direction of the lady's back, and keeps on keeping on.    While they are containing  Russia and entering onto the quicksand of  China and patronizing Africa,  and calculating the Caribbean plunder, and the South China Sea booty,  the niggers are aware that no one has discussed  anything at all with the niggers.    Well. Niggers don't own nothing, got no flag, even our names  are hand-me-downs and you don't change that  by calling yourself X: sometimes that just makes it worse,  like obliterating the path that leads back to whence you came, and  to where you can begin.  And, anyway, none of this changes the reality,  which is, for example, that I do not want my son  to die in Guantanamo,  or anywhere else, for that matter,  serving the Stars and Stripes.  (I've seen some stars. I got some stripes.)    Neither (incidentally) has anyone discussed the Bomb with the niggers: the incoherent feeling is, the less the nigger knows about the Bomb, the better:  the lady of the house smiles nervously in your direction as though she had just been overheard discussing family, or sexual secrets,  and changes the subject to Education,  or Full Employment, or the Welfare rolls,  the smile saying, Don't be dismayed.  We know how you feel. You can trust us.   Yeah. I would like to believe you. But we are not talking about belief.   4The sons of greed, the heirs of plunder,  are approaching the end of their journey:  it is amazing that they approach without wonder,  as though they have, themselves, become that scorched and blasphemed earth,  the stricken buffalo, the slaughtered tribes,  the endless, virgin, bloodsoaked plain, the famine, the silence, the children's eyes,  murder masquerading as salvation, seducing every democratic eye, the mouths of truth and anguish choked with cotton,  rape delirious with the fragrance of magnolia, the hacking of the fruit of their loins to pieces,   hey! the tar-baby sons and nephews, the high-yaller      nieces, and Tom's black prick hacked off  to rustle in crinoline,  to hang, heaviest of heirlooms, between the pink and alabaster breasts of the Great Man's Lady, or worked into the sash at the waist of the high-yaller Creole bitch, or niece, a chunk of shining brown-black satin, staring, staring, like the single eye of God:   creation yearns to re-create a time when we were able to recognize a crime.    Alas,  my stricken kinsmen,  the party is over:  there have never been any white people,  anywhere: the trick was accomplished with mirrors  look: where is your image now?  where your inheritance,  on what rock stands this pride?   Oh,  I counsel you,  leave History alone. She is exhausted,  sitting, staring into her dressing-room mirror, and wondering what rabbit, now,  to pull out of what hat,  and seriously considering retirement,  even though she knows her public dare not let her go.   She must change.  Yes. History must change.  A slow, syncopated relentless music begins suggesting her re-entry, transformed, virginal as she was, in the Beginning, untouched,  as the Word was spoken,  before the rape which debased her to be the whore of multitudes, or,  as one might say, before she became the Star,  whose name, above our title,  carries the Show, making History the patsy, responsible for every flubbed line,  every missed cue, responsible for the life and death, of all bright illusions and dark delusions, Lord, History is weary of her unspeakable liaison with Time,  for Time and History have never seen eye to eye:  Time laughs at History and time and time and time again Time traps History in a lie.   But we always, somehow, managed to roar History back onstage to take another bow, to justify, to sanctify the journey until now.    Time warned us to ask for our money back,  and disagreed with History as concerns colours white and black. Not only do we come from further back, but the light of the Sun marries all colours as one.    Kinsmen,  I have seen you betray your Saviour (it is you who call Him Saviour)  so many times, and I have spoken to Him about you,  behind your back.  Quite a lot has been going on  behind your back, and,  if your phone has not yet been disconnected,  it will soon begin to ring:  informing you, for example, that a whole generation,  in Africa, is about to die,  and a new generation is about to rise, and will not need your bribes,  or your persuasions, any more:  not your morality. No plundered gold  Ah! Kinsmen, if I could make you see the crime is not what you have done to me! It is you who are blind,  you, bowed down with chains,  you, whose children mock you, and seek another  master, you, who cannot look man or woman or child in the  eye, whose sleep is blank with terror,  for whom love died long ago, somewhere between the airport and the safe-deposit box, the buying and selling of rising or falling stocks,  you, who miss Zanzibar and Madagascar and Kilimanjaro and lions and tigers and elephants and zebras  and flying fish and crocodiles and alligators and leopards and crashing waterfalls and endless rivers,  flowers fresher than Eden, silence sweeter than the  grace of God, passion at every turning, throbbing in the bush,  thicker, oh, than honey in the hive,  dripping dripping opening, welcoming, aching from toe to bottom to spine,  sweet heaven on the line to last forever, yes,  but, now,  rejoicing ends, man, a price remains to pay,  your innocence costs too much and we can't carry you on our books or our backs, any longer: baby, find another Eden, another apple tree, somewhere, if you can,  and find some other natives, somewhere else, to listen to you bellow till you come, just like a man,  but we don't need you, are sick of being a fantasy to feed you,  and of being the principal accomplice to your crime:  for, it is your crime, now, the cross to which you cling,  your Alpha and Omega for everything.    Well (others have told you) your clown's grown weary, the puppet master is bored speechless with this monotonous disaster,  and is long gone, does not belong to you,  any more than my woman, or my child,  ever belonged to you.    During this long travail our ancestors spoke to us, and we listened,  and we tried to make you hear life in our song but now it matters not at all to me  whether you know what I am talking about or not: I know why we are not blinded by your brightness, are able to see you,  who cannot see us. I know  why we are still here.    Godspeed.  The niggers are calculating,  from day to day, life everlasting,  and wish you well:  but decline to imitate the Son of the Morning,  and rule in Hell.      Salt peanuts, salt peanuts,for dear hearts and gentle people, and cheerful, shining, simple Uncle Sam! Nigger, read this and run!Now, if you can't read, run anyhow! From Manifest Destiny(Cortez, and all his men(Cortez, and all his mensilent upon a peak in Darien)silent upon a peak in Darien)to A Decent Interval,and the chopper rises above Saigon,abandoning the noble causeand the people we have made ignobleand whom we leave there, now, to die, one moves, With All Deliberate Speed,to the South China Sea, and beyond, where millions of new niggersawait glad tidings!  No, said the Great Man's Lady,No,I'm against abortion,I'm against abortion,I always feel that's killing somebody.I always feel that's killing somebody.Well, what about capital punishment?I think the death penalty helps.I think the death penalty helps. That's right.Up to our ass in niggerson Death Row. Oh, Susanna,Oh, Susanna,don't you cry for me!don't you cry for me!   2 Well, I guess what the niggers is supposed to be doingis putting themselves in the path of that old sweet chariotand have it swing down and carry us home. That would help, as they say,helpand they got waysof sort of nudging the chariot.They still got influencewith Wind and Water,though they in for some surpriseswith Cloud and Fire. My days are not their days.My ways are not their ways.I would not think of them,one way or the other,did not they so grotesquelyblock the viewbetween me and my brother. And, so, I always wonder:can blindness be desired?Then, what must the blinded eyes have seento wish to see no more! For, I have seen, in the eyes regarding me, or regarding my brother, have seen, deep in the farthest valleyof the eye, have seena flame leap up, then flicker and go out,have seen a veil come down,leaving myself, and the other,alone in that cavewhich every soul remembers, andout of which, desperately afraid, I turn, turn, stagger, stumble out, into the healing air,fall flat on the healing ground, singing praises, counsellingmy heart, my soul, to praise. What is it that this peoplecannot forget? Surely, they cannot be deludedas to imagine that their crimesare original? There is nothing in the least originalabout the fiery tongs to the eyeballs,the sex torn from the socket,the infant ripped from the womb, the brains dashed out against rock,nothing original about Judas,or Peter, or you or me: nothing:we are liars and cowards all,or nearly all, or nearly all the time:for we also ride the lightning,answer the thunder, penetrate whirlwinds,curl up on the floor of the sun,and pick our teeth with thunderbolts. Then, perhaps they imaginethat their crimes are not crimes?  Perhaps.Perhaps that is why they cannot repent, why there is no possibility of repentance.Manifest Destiny is a hymn to madness, feeding on itself, ending(when it ends) in madness: the action is blindness and pain,pain bringing a torpor so deep that every act is willed,is desperately forced,is willed to be a blow: the hand becomes a fist,the prick becomes a club, the womb a dangerous swamp,the hope, and fear, of loveis acid in the marrow of the bone. No, their fire is not quenched, nor can be: the oil feeding the flamesbeing the unadmitted terror of the wrath of God.  Yes. But let us put it in another, less theological way: though theology has absolutely nothing to do with what I am trying to say.But the moment God is mentionedtheology is summonedto buttress or demolish belief:an exercise which renders belief irrelevantand adds to the despair of Fifth Avenue on any afternoon, the people moving, homeless, through the city,praying to find sanctuary before the sky and the towers come tumbling down, before the earth opens, as it does in Superman.SupermanThey know that no one will appearto turn back time, they know it, just as they knowthat the earth has opened before and will open again, just as they knowthat their empire is falling, is doomed,nothing can hold it up, nothing.We are not talking about belief.   3 the niggers made, make it, how come the niggers are still here. But, then, again, I don't think they dareto think of that: no: I'm fairly certain they don't think of that at all. Lord, I with the alabaster lady of the house, with Beulah.Beulah about sixty, built in four-square, biceps like Mohammed Ali,she at the stove, fixing biscuits, scrambling eggs and bacon, fixing coffee, pouring juice, and the lady of the house,she say, she don't know how howshe'd get along without Beulahand Beulah just silently grunts,I reckon you don't,I reckon you don't,and keeps on keeping onand the lady of the house sayShe's just like one of the family,She's just like one of the family,and Beulah turns, gives me a look, sucks her teeth and rolls her eyesin the direction of the lady's back, andkeeps on keeping on.  While they are containing Russiaand entering onto the quicksand of Chinaand patronizingAfrica, and calculatingthe Caribbean plunder, andthe South China Sea booty, the niggers are aware that no one has discussed anything at all with the niggers.  Well. Niggers don't own nothing,got no flag, even our names are hand-me-downsand you don't change that by calling yourself X:sometimes that just makes it worse, like obliterating the path that leads backto whence you came, and to where you can begin. And, anyway, none of this changes the reality, which is, for example, that I do not want my son to die in Guantanamo, or anywhere else, for that matter, serving the Stars and Stripes. (I've seen some stars.seen I got some stripes.) got  Neither (incidentally)has anyone discussed the Bomb with the niggers:the incoherent feeling is, the lessthe nigger knows about the Bomb, the better: the lady of the housesmiles nervously in your directionas though she had just been overhearddiscussing family, or sexual secrets, and changes the subject to Education, or Full Employment, or the Welfare rolls, the smile saying, Don't be dismayed. Don't be dismayed.We know how you feel. You can trust us.We know how you feel. You can trust us. Yeah. I would like to believe you.But we are not talking about belief.  4The sons of greed, the heirs of plunder, The sons of greed, the heirs of plunder,are approaching the end of their journey: it is amazing that they approach without wonder, as though they have, themselves, becomethat scorched and blasphemed earth, the stricken buffalo, the slaughtered tribes, the endless, virgin, bloodsoaked plain,the famine, the silence, the children's eyes, murder masquerading as salvation, seducingevery democratic eye,the mouths of truth and anguish choked with cotton, rape delirious with the fragrance of magnolia,the hacking of the fruit of their loins to pieces,  hey! the tar-baby sons and nephews, the high-yallerhey!       nieces, to rustle in crinoline, to hang, heaviest of heirlooms,between the pink and alabaster breastsof the Great Man's Lady,or worked into the sash at the waistof the high-yaller Creole bitch, or niece,a chunk of shining brown-black satin,staring, staring, like the single eye of God: creation yearns to re-create a timewhen we were able to recognize a crime.  Alas, my stricken kinsmen, the party is over: there have never been any white people, anywhere: the trick was accomplished with mirrors look: where is your image now? where your inheritance, on what rock stands this pride? Oh, I counsel you, leave History alone.She is exhausted, sitting, staring into her dressing-room mirror,and wondering what rabbit, now, to pull out of what hat, and seriously considering retirement, even though she knows her publicdare not let her go. She must change. Yes. History must change. A slow, syncopatedrelentless music beginssuggesting her re-entry,transformed, virginal as she was,in the Beginning, untouched, as the Word was spoken, before the rape which debased herto be the whore of multitudes, or, as one might say, before she became the Star, whose name, above our title, carries the Show, making History the patsy,responsible for every flubbed line, every missed cue, responsible for the lifeand death, of all bright illusionsand dark delusions,Lord, History is wearyof her unspeakable liaison with Time, for Time and Historyhave never seen eye to eye: Time laughs at Historyand time and time and time againTime traps History in a lie. But we always, somehow, managedto roar History back onstageto take another bow,to justify, to sanctifythe journey until now.  Time warned us to ask for our money back, and disagreed with Historyas concerns colours white and black.Not only do we come from further back,but the light of the Sunmarries all colours as one.  Kinsmen, I have seen you betray your Saviour(it is you who call Him Saviour) you so many times, andI have spoken to Him about you, behind your back. Quite a lot has been going on behind your back, and, if your phone has not yet been disconnected, it will soon begin to ring: informing you, for example, that a whole generation, in Africa, is about to die, and a new generation is about to rise,and will not need your bribes, or your persuasions, any more: not your morality. No plundered gold Ah! Kinsmen, if I could make you seethe crime is not what you have done to me!It is you who are blind, you, bowed down with chains, you, whose children mock you, and seek another master,you, who cannot look man or woman or child in the eye,whose sleep is blank with terror, for whom love died long ago,somewhere between the airport and the safe-depositbox,the buying and selling of rising or falling stocks, you, who miss Zanzibar and Madagascar and Kilimanjaroand lions and tigers and elephants and zebras and flying fish and crocodiles and alligators andleopardsand crashing waterfalls and endless rivers, flowers fresher than Eden, silence sweeter than the grace of God,passion at every turning, throbbing in the bush, thicker, oh, than honey in the hive, drippingdrippingopening, welcoming, aching from toe to bottomto spine, sweet heaven on the lineto last forever, yes, but, now, rejoicing ends, man, a price remains to pay, your innocence costs too muchand we can't carry you on our booksor our backs, any longer: baby,find another Eden, another apple tree,somewhere, if you can, and find some other natives, somewhere else,to listen to you bellowtill you come, just like a man, but we don't need you,are sick of being a fantasy to feed you, and of being the principal accomplice to yourcrime: for, it is your crime, now, the cross to which youyourcling, your Alpha and Omega for everything.  Well (others have told you)your clown's grown weary, the puppet masteris bored speechless with this monotonous disaster, and is long gone, does not belong to you, any more than my woman, or my child, ever belonged to you.  During this long travailour ancestors spoke to us, and we listened, and we tried to make you hear life in our songbut now it matters not at all to me whether you know what I am talking about or not:I know why we are not blindedby your brightness, are able to see you, who cannot see us. I know why we are still here.  Godspeed. The niggers are calculating, from day to day, life everlasting, and wish you well: but decline to imitate the Son of the Morning, and rule in Hell.    

these are my people & I find them on the street & shadow through any wild all wild my people my people a dance of strangers in my blood the old woman s sari dissolving to wind bindi a new moon on her forehead I claim her my kin & sew the star of her to my breast the toddler dangling from stroller hair a fountain of dandelion seed at the bakery I claim them too the sikh uncle at the airport who apologizes for the pat down the muslim man who abandons his car at the traffic light drops to his knees at the call of the azan & the muslim man who sips good whiskey at the start of maghrib the lone khala at the park pairing her kurta with crocs my people my people I can t be lost when I see you my compass is brown & gold & blood my compass a muslim teenager snapback & high-tops gracing the subway platform mashallah I claim them all my country is made in my people s image if they come for you they come for me too in the dead of winter a flock of aunties step out on the sand their dupattas turn to ocean a colony of uncles grind their palms & a thousand jasmines bell the air my people I follow you like constellations we hear the glass smashing the street & the nights opening their dark our names this country s wood for the fire my people my people the long years we ve survived the long years yet to come I see you map my sky the light your lantern long ahead & I follow I follow

At the festival of almost getting there Zeno pokes his head out halfway, asks   directions, half-heartedly, to the train, admits he s been riding on the tortoise,   been running after arrows to watch them stand still. He understands course, path,   way, even relative position (dichotomize, divide) but motion s still a figment:   distance halved and halved (split infinity, twin trajectory) the long, long way, and all   that longing (two-fold, doubled) (moments, instants, continuous or discrete) for some   unfamiliar end such unforgiving progress, portioned, yes, bisected. A half-assed effort?   No, he s as good as got it. So much struggle and amends. Sure, we re goddamned tired of   this much waiting, but look! He s halfway there.  

The pure amnesia of her face, newborn. I looked so far into her that, for a while,   the visual held no memory. Little by little, I returned to myself, waking to nurse   those first nights in that familiar room where all the objects had been altered   imperceptibly: the gardenia blooming in the dark in the scarred water glass,   near the phone my handwriting illegible, the patterned lamp- shade angled downward and away   from the long mirror where I stood and looked at the woman holding her child.   Her face kept dissolving into expressions resembling my own, but the child s was pure   figurative, resembling no one. We floated together in the space a lullaby makes, head to head,   half-sleeping. Save it,Save it, my mother would say, meaning just the opposite. She didn t   want to hear my evidence against her terrible optimism for me. And though, despite her,   I can redeem, in a pawnshop sense, almost any bad moment from my childhood, I see now   what she must have intended for me. I felt it for her, her,  watching her as she slept,   watching her suck as she dreamed of sucking, lightheaded with thirst as my blood flowed   suddenly into tissue that changed it to milk. No matter that we were alone, there s a   texture that moves between me and whatever might have injured us then. Like the curtain s sheer   opacity, it remains drawn over what view we have of dawn here in this onetime desert,   now green and replenished, its perfect climate unthreatened in memory    though outside, as usual, the wind blew, the bough bent, under the eaves, the hummingbird   touched once the bloodcolored hourglass, the feeder, then was gone.  

Most of what happens happens beyond words. The lexicon of lip and fingertip defies translation into common speech. I recognize the musk of your dark hair. It always thrills me, though I can't describe it. My finger on your thigh does not touch skin  it touches your skin warming to my touch.your  You are a language I have learned by heart.   This intimate patois will vanish with us, its only native speakers. Does it matter? Our tribal chants, our dances round the fire performed the sorcery we most required. They bound us in a spell time could not break. Let the young vaunt their ecstasy. We keep our tribe of two in sovereign secrecy. What must be lost was never lost on us.  

Where we d recently lain, exchanging a kiss, stork consorted with crane,  limpkin with ibis. limpkin with ibis. Was this as much wedding as there would ever be, the fowls  foot-webbing, the identificatory the identificatory ring around a throat? Exchange of earth and air: not a vow but a vote of confidence a feather of confidence a feather might tip by a single scale ...     That one s a raconteur, so much salt in his tale; this one s a countertenor, this one s a countertenor, lilting above the feast. The archon of his hectare    spotted   spotted least. Here s a little heckler ...     Here s a little heckler ...     penciled seagull in the margin. Following line by line the path you took, I imagine no print so fine.no print so fine.

Hard, heavy, slow, dark, Or so I find them, the hands of Te Whaea   Teaching me to die. Some lightness will come later When the heart has lost its unjust hope   For special treatment. Today I go with a bucket Over the paddocks of young grass,   So delicate like fronds of maidenhair, Looking for mushrooms. I find twelve of them,   Most of them little, and some eaten by maggots, But they ll do to add to the soup. It s a long time now   Since the great ikons fell down, God, Mary, home, sex, poetry,   Whatever one uses as a bridge To cross the river that only has one beach,   And even one s name is a way of saying    This gap inside a coat    the darkness I call God,   The darkness I call Te Whaea, how can they translate The blue calm evening sky that plane tunnels through   Like a little wasp, or the bucket in my hand, Into something else? I go on looking   For mushrooms in the field, and the fist of longing Punches my heart, until it is too dark to see.

When I first heard you on the phone your voice had to be that '40s wartime voice for it to get under my skin like it did, after seven years asleep.  You re at the beginning of something, you said,You re at the beginning of something, and I m at the end of something;and I m at the end of something; but you didn t go away, twice-born, three times, coming around, rough cello.                                      Late days I want to drive to your grave, But I don t belong to it.  

As I come down the hill from Toro Poutini s house My feet are sore, being bare, on the sharp stones   And that is a suitable penance. The dust of the pa road Is cool, though, and I can see   The axe of the moon shift down behind the trees Very slowly. The red light from the windows   Of the church has a ghostly look, and in This place ghosts are real. The bees are humming loudly   In moonlight in their old hive above the church door Where I go in to kneel, and come out to make my way   Uphill past a startled horse who plunges in the paddock Above the nunnery. Now there are one or two   Of the tribe back in the big house What would you have me do, King Jesus? Your games with me have turned me into a boulder.  

Were t aught to me I bore the canopy, With my extern the outward honouring, Or laid great bases for eternity, Which proves more short than waste or ruining; Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour Lose all, and more, by paying too much rent, For compound sweet forgoing simple savour, Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent? No; let me be obsequious in thy heart, And take thou my oblation, poor but free, Which is not mix d with seconds, knows no art, But mutual render, only me for thee.    Hence, thou suborn d informer! a true soul,    When most impeach d, stands least in thy control.   

Off with the wristwatch, the Reeboks, the belt.              My laptop's in a bin. I dig out the keys from my jeans and do              my best Midwestern grin. At O'Hare, at Atlanta, at Dallas/Fort Worth,              it happens every trip, at LaGuardia, Logan, and Washington Dulles,              the customary strip is never enough for  a young brown male              whose name comes up at random. Lest the randomness of it be doubted, observe              how Myrtle's searched in tandem, how Doris's six-pack of Boost has been seized              and Ethel gets the wand. How polite of the screeners to sham paranoia              when what they really want is to pick out the swarthiest, scruffiest of us              and pat us top to toe, my fellow Ahmeds and my alien Alis,              Mohammed alias Mo  my buddies from med school, my doubles partners,              my dark unshaven brothers whose names overlap with the crazies and God fiends,              ourselves the goateed other.

I love these raw moist dawns with a thousand birds you hear but can't quite see in the mist. My old alien body is a foreigner struggling to get into another country. The loon call makes me shiver. Back at the cabin I see a book and am not quite sure what that is.

Tired of walking and checking the lines of the tourist train that trundles through this town, famous for its pottery and brackish dune pools once visited by St. George and his dragon, and the lady with her unicorn, I stopped by at a convenient place to sit and shuck my sweet corn and let the local men hang their gates from my eyes. All they could offer were other versions of myself: soft and sweaty, sick of the big car diet dished up by Detroit and the cocktail-party and locker-room chatter I've had to tackle while touring this country's musky beaches. Choosing to drive to my next stop, I found perched upon a tall chalk cliff the statue of a broad-bodied chaser so large I could never easily handle him as a top. He'd been added on to so many times over the centuries, that it was only really possible to identify him by touch: a little more shy, perhaps, than other guys his age, an abstract clock-face jutting from the pack I could feel buckled around his waist, and such wee-wee nuts, he could only be named, I whispered, Patience.Patience I camped there in his shadow 'til noon the next day, and drove away leaving a few of my burnt bones there, behind.

Women want to save you or want you to savage them. Men want to see what is under your towel. The dollar bills they throw into your cage are all you need to care about because you aren t dancing in a cage to entertain them.   You dance in a cage to make money. I open my towel to the right then whip it back toward midline just as I open to the left: I show them nothing. But I have them convinced I will show them something. There is a difference between men and women    you must look women in the eyes and, if possible, look hurt; with men, you must avoid looking at them altogether, you must focus on moving your hips, which is close to what they are actually watching. Suspended in a cage above the far end   of the dance floor, I was not attainable; I made myself seem attainable. These are just the basics. Wearing nothing but a towel, my greyish wings extended to full wingspan, my chest shaved  the clubbers believe I am wearing a costume.   It is amazing what people believe. The music is cheaper than a Budweiser. The air is smoke and the smell of smoke mixed with sweat, and your job is to convince each of them you are dancing for no one else. When my shift is over and I pull on some jeans,   tuck my wings and bandage them down, pull on two shirts, I can almost pretend I never entered that cage in the first place. Outside on Lansdowne Street, there are people standing in one line or another waiting to get in to clubs. Night after night, the same thing: the waiting never ends.  

They put me in a dead boy s clothes dead Joseph Except he wasn t dead at first they put Me in his clothes dead Joseph s     after Joseph Died and I used to call him Joe     they put Me in   Joe s clothes at first before he died Joe wasn t five yet when I met him      I Was seven     I was seven when he died Still but a whole year bigger then but I Wore his clothes still and the whole year I lived with Momma Varina      and with daddy Jeff I never lived so good as when I lived with Them and especially it was daddy Jeff Who kept me fed and wearing those nice clothes Until they fit as tight as bandages

Three dark buds for the Trinity On one twig I found in the lining of my coat   Forgotten since I broke them from the tree That grows opposite the RSA building   At the top of Vulcan Lane   there I would lay down my parka On the grass and meditate, cross-legged; there was a girl   Who sat beside me there; She would hold a blue flower at the centre of the bullring   While the twigs on the tree became black And then slowly green again   she was young   if I had said,    Have my coat; have my money    She would have gone away; but because I gave her nothing   She came again and again to share that nothing Like a bird that nest in the open hand.  

The poem can start with him walking backwards into a room. He takes off his jacket and sits down for the rest of his life; that s how we bring Dad back. I can make the blood run back up my nose, ants rushing into a hole. We grow into smaller bodies, my breasts disappear, your cheeks soften, teeth sink back into gums. I can make us loved, just say the word. Give them stumps for hands if even once they touched us without consent, I can write the poem and make it disappear. Step-Dad spits liquor back into glass, Mum s body rolls back up the stairs, the bone pops back into place, maybe she keeps the baby. Maybe we re okay kid? I ll rewrite this whole life and this time there ll be so much love, you won t be able to see beyond it.   You won t be able to see beyond it, I ll rewrite this whole life and this time there ll be so much love. Maybe we re okay kid, maybe she keeps the baby. Mum s body rolls back up the stairs, the bone pops back into place, Step-Dad spits liquor back into glass. I can write the poem and make it disappear, give them stumps for hands if even once they touched us without consent, I can make us loved, just say the word. Your cheeks soften, teeth sink back into gums we grow into smaller bodies, my breasts disappear. I can make the blood run back up my nose, ants rushing into a hole, that s how we bring Dad back. He takes off his jacket and sits down for the rest of his life. The poem can start with him walking backwards into a room.  

As Walter settled in to finish his coffee, he was struck by a phantom, peripheral visage, white as pins in flight, or bunny white, in haze   a visit from  The Agent,  in the nominal parlance of chemical memory, calling from a distant muddied element. Or was it merely the milk he d spilled in a fatuous fit, hooking out to the Brooklyn back of his cup? All he could abide, he put his face down in the muck, and made off for The Dude s abode.  These are purple times,  he thought,  when pseudo-pious cliques strike polyester poses while jockeying for pockets. And mocking fatuous Donny? That sweet prince, that palsied, hiccuping flake of bunny fluff?  Not for this aggression would he stand   not for that element. It required satisfaction, and of superior sort to parlance. Oh, but he would have his ear! Though for this spar: lance and blade, tooth and trigger   less to mind, and more, would he abide, in body to this immodest plum-clad receptacle. He popped a Velemint, and rang His Dudeness s door.  Bolted,  Duder s hand had struck in ink,  Out of cream. Gone to market. 8pm practice.  His buddy was benumbed:  Dash this dairy! You ve become fat to us with cordials of coffee and curds. Oh, uncareful beverage! Such fatuous froth and foam will be your undoing!  Yet not undone, but in parlay with his special lady, laid up in zesty enterprise, coital as bunnies, making maudlin moan. The story is ludicrous. Though if one abides that one must  feed one s monkey,  in manner most gutter-struck, and not with precious prandials,  Brie pour lui. Et pour elle,  emmental,  one can dig El Duderino s doings. All others are cowards   elements without sentiment, without Johnsons or ethos, foreign and fatuous, with lingonberries on leashes, and marmot marmalades struck onto pancakes. Neither good men nor thorough, poor in parlance and in practice, unable to fix cable or walk on water   though may abide it when seated, in slumber, in summer, with clouds above, as Bunny puffs on polish. The poor woman, helpless as a frail fawn beneath a nude sun. A trophy wife, atrophied, fallen in with the wrong element: known pornographers; sycophants; Aimee Mann. Difficult to abide, and not exactly lightweights, is she herself to blame for her fatuous caprices? Her husband s lost legs? The Dude s stained parlor rug   his only tether, the life and memory of it, dimmed when stricken? Oh, the little for which we are compensated. About the size of our abidance, and theirs: some Credence tapes; a can of ashes, released to the  elements; specklike Brandt, crisp and shivering. A yet-to-be-dismantled toe, Bunny s.

nothing left to worship. The three-tined sun is on a string. A chain to hang you on. A rope to coil when you re done.   Lately, a sharp-winged bird skims the dusk dragging the web-footed dark.   Up there down there.   Foreground. Background. What you can swing from.  

To be born yellow into a household where the black man rules with his fists  and the white wife  body   livid   with      devotion         hip enough to confuse  trouble with   love    or   whatever   it  was, such the  lucky  one   to come up so unamerican   ,   thankful  one   in whose imagination the  country danger is   so ambient  and precise  of   source   it vanishes    and with each departure  more affectionate    machines   panting   to run the dream between  hope    and  habit     I wanted to say this more clearly         In what ways  did   watching  your black father beat your white mother   empower   you   as a brown   baby   ?   in  a blue    way      is  there anything   so  cruel   so    crude    as  to say   you felt   each   of your hands   in their  puppet   throats   as they screamed   for help   in   unison   but  only    one  was   hunted  for   room   within the invisible  listener   Only one  could  pray  that      far      I wanted to say this more clearly       trustless of a soul  who hadn t   suffered  he tore  hers  toward him  And I arrived as a kind of vengeance, the many versions of war worn raw by their sex, come to be as the treacherous peace of empty pacts    and broken  chessmen were scattered all over the room                   It s like being the last person alive  

      

You might make a choice between what descends with these tiles lined before you, or arcing forward through a history that is constant against us. A bridge to block out the dawn. Or monoxide that passes like breath. My breath. I know all about what s underground, and I keep my searches for the invisible there. In the park above, you ve got your bike locked and the chain cut. The stubborn part doesn t say anything, doesn t need to to start marching home, ugly block, block of shouting, block syrupy with flies. I would like to hear about it, but I am backed into an argument myself on a coil of cool fall breeze, backed through seasons into the past, home or near it, in the moment when I m as right as I ll ever be bled into I ll be this right forever. There s no out available for this character, just a decade producing the present, warm, and then warmer around him. It was as if I hadn t seen the harbor, didn t want to admit it by doing so now. Something like a pile of books falls over inside me or the room I m in breaks off from the house, slides almost out of view. All things didn t happen or did. You might ve routed a highway so it crashes through the seventh floor of a skyscraper, and the moment for that passes by us still. You can live like a column of light pours over you, but that s not all you ll see.

Between Grand Central Parkway and Little Bay, from One Hundred Sixty-Ninth and Hillside to Union Turnpike, to work   countless days the streets I take to work. The front yard of roses    did I write their names down correctly?    Zephirine, Charis, Proud Land, Drouhin, Blale. Q31 bus, among the words I hear are Jamie, Jamie does not like to be humiliated, Jamie is not about to forget it, either. Not physically well, a poor man, arrested on suspicion of selling cigarettes loose, on the street, held, choked, left unconscious, still handcuffed, no cardiopulmonary resuscitation administered, pronounced dead, the cause of death, according to the autopsy report, a homicide    rectally infused puree of hummus, nuts, and raisins, by employees of the Agency s contractor, isn t torture, Director of Central Intelligence explains, but, merely, legally justified means of enhanced interrogation. 3708 Utopia Parkway was Joseph Cornell s small wood-frame house. He might have worked on the Medici Slot MachineMedici Slot Machine on his kitchen table, a Renaissance Box, a theater he called it, the Medici and Mussolini s Fascist state set in a metaphorical relation, its inner lines the lines of the floor plan of the Pitti Palace, the inclusion of an actual compass rose the expression of an ascent from the temporal to the spiritual. In what place, the Federal Reserve s monetary spigots and banks  access to cash pieced together with indexed futures, to reduce the market s decline   in what places, violations of which forms of which eternal laws? Is it error, the idea that no place, too, is a place? On the corner of Utopia Parkway and Union Turnpike, in red-blue twilight abstracted into an energy blowing it apart, in spaces of language transformed and coded, to be decoded and recoded in the future.

Elsewhere as internal. A journal a journey. Not geographical, conquering or colonizing.   One is always outside. Even this is a distance. The enclosure is temporary, temporal, a noticing. A space interior, represented by room or book. Diurnal   a journal. Small volumeDiurnal      containing the services for the little, or day, hours. An exquisite butterfly,   as distinguished from a moth. Day after day extinguished and preserved.   Distance measured in days, ending in death, or when the book is full.     Her notebooks. I want to tell you about this. (You?)     To listen secretly   to what is said.     "The men's tongues are jewels.     The women's ears are jewels.       Her husband is described in sovereign terms. Her primary role is hostess. Going out into the world is a matter     what is the matter     of ominous glimpses     No indicators, distinctions of time, in this over and over.   The antistrophe is the catastrophe.       Route in day.day.   In a given day, whatever is done.   From one place to another,   whether distant or near. A passage   through life, a passage written, epic   remains in a room, the female tribe questing.     The self-reflections, abruptions, eruptions, the thinking going only so far as it will,   ending in midair     or much further than it needs to         Travel, because it reveals? Ravels? Ravel itself ambiguous,Ravel    to ravel and unravel the same and sharing opposite meanings     "to let fall into a tangled mass; to separate or undo   the texture of." Tangled and separate.     "Hence to entangle, make intricate, involve;   Hence to disentangle, make plain."   Traveling one sees connection and mystery. One sees?   Sightings/sitings. As though there's a hope   one could situate, identify, locate.   Claim. The first to sight land.   If you see it, it is yours.         Her slides   and the scribbled notes on her typed accompaniment     which accompanied which?   (The notion of forefronting she attempts to subvert.)   Small chapters, various and repetitive (cumulative, cyclical, consequential, or in-).   Typography gives way.     The "central" fiction is perhaps hers, yet is continually disrupted.   (This word whose connotations I don t entirely or exclusively intend or negate.) The intimate distance of telephoto lens     The attempt at both. Objectivity without imposing pattern.   She "eavesdropping" (a hearing and house word) on her neighbors.   Slides of a wounded man, windowed woman.   They were without narrative, yet we imposed narrative.   We couldn't stay distanced or objective watching   was this a failure     wanting to see what would happen.         The new earrings (which otherwise seem an anomaly, not connecting as the other slides connect   private with public)     But what more intimate than the jeweled ear,   what more public       The point of connection    We hear. The ornamented ear. Up close, a whisper.       A construct more complex and inclusive.   "Evidence," noticings, of equal value.     There is a large painting behind her projector, someone else's artwork     it mirrors the images in her slides   a scarred man, the musical staves of telephone lines   traversing empty skies, a house with a vacant window (the woman has left   to answer the phone, hoping it is the man, that he is safe).     When this painting is pointed out (I point it out) she says, "That's the way life is."       The repetitions   not even realizing they re the same revelations.       Accretions and accumulations, if one learns at all it is  eventually.      Journal entries as openings. Misspelling:  entires.        Begin to read The New York Times again   thus the world enters.The New York Times          I did start reading the paper. Manic, middle of the night, on chemo.   Moon face, legs that would no longer hold me, fingers that could not   cut or turn or grasp. I read. Obsessed   with news of a world I was not in.   My doctor said, "Give it an hour a day. Limit it." But the prednesone   hallucination in my brain, every time I closed my eyes, looked like an explosion,   an atom bomb, repeating, ceaselessly. My atoms. I read about Chernobyl. I ate the words. The poisoned milk, the vegetables.   My skin was scarred, burned from the inside, red on the surface from treatment   that charred my cells. Doctors from my hospital flew there, trying to save lives.   Half my head was bald, overnight. Toxic, waste. Waist-length hair covered the bald spot   for awhile, till it too fell out in handfuls. My face a moon. My hair no halo. My face a plate.   White and pasty, red from exertion which was nothing at all, red from staying awake. Red   from burning. Red from sweats, leaning forward and watching it rain on the newspapers . . .         The short and the long of it.   Containing and erasing all history in this present moment.   Every sentence could be threaded together, shuffled direct connections.     Integration without the abyss?   The world's madness and disintegration do not cause madness and disintegration The blurring disregard of boundaries The water which falls in drops from the eaves of a house. To stand under the eaves,   as to listen and learn     what is said within doors:   "It is beautiful and we are just beginning to recover from it."

Anyone watching you in the water would think:  A siren!  Winner in the women s swimming event, you seem strange on the screen of my inglorious life. While you smile in triumph I tie a thread, a thin unbreakable thing, to your toe but you stride past without noticing me. Your friends, young like yourself, crowd round and make a noise in the bar; and then just for a moment cloud-shadow, a grave motherly shadow shivers down from your eyebrows to the proud, beautiful chin   and joins your rising to my own setting sun.  

I was in Asia Minor in pursuit of distant honor in a suit of finest armor in a forest of pine or planks. I was not lost. Regina (my sextant) stared into the refiner s flare as evening grew maligner.               I was in Kazakhstan             collecting rarest poppies. My capstan             gave out. I could no more withstand             the tides than fall to the rattan             mat like Tristan             sailing emptily to his mutant             island.                           I was in greater Ghana                         harvesting marijuana                         with soul-strafing Tatiana,                         the local swan a                         mortal one, a                         prize among the fauna.                         (There should have been a lawn a-                                       gainst her.) You see, I was in Corinth                                     fabricating synth-                                     etic absinthe.                                     I was adamant. The                                     trophy I chased for the ninth                                     night of days was Cynth                                     -ia, succumbing at the plinth.                           Then to Argentina                         I set forth with Ekaterina                         a diminishing ballerina.                         She pled for fina-                         steride, having seen a                         parrot turn bright green u-                         pon my mythic ocarina.               I was in Tel Aviv.             Viv-             ian (my pigeon) and I were feve             -rish from bouts of griev-             ous liv-             er malaise. We must have been naive             -r than a hibernal beave   -r, for soon I was in Canada as ever. Had no plan; not a home to hide in, nothing human. Ada (vulgar bird) went wan, bade a screeching goodnight to her one God, a soapstone strap-on. Alone, I ran a do- zen tests: None truer, none sadder.

Since I stopped the flow Of primordial ciswhite straight men Whom I heedlessly collect And from whom the spring feeds Without reason I have been Shopping so much more Than suits a prophet in the forest. A man said he felt like an awful cad But an admission as such Does not irrigate a dry spell Once it s surpassed the length Of a petty offense record Because the body s memory is not so Mutated by language And there s very little pleasure in force When the subject is inertia. I used to leave as soon as The mysterious chemistry worked out Now I am both the one who leaves And the one who stays Eco -novelty is rare and common And each design reforms The future and the last.

some say I'm now almost extinct in this park but the people who say this don't know that by smelling the orchids in the trees they're sensing the fragrance of my chops that by hearing the rumbling of the waterfalls they're listening to my ancestors' great roar that by observing the constellations of the night sky they're gazing at the star spots on my fur that I am and always will be the wild untamed living spirit of this jungle

Is there no when where this dream will rest?Blue smoke, wings, a plagueBlue smoke, wings, a plague of  walls, the city motionless, massof mind and angst risingof mind and angst rising in the brilliance of a cloudless light[le ciel, c est mauve comme la lavande].[le ciel, c est mauve comme la lavande].le ciel, c est mauve comme la lavande Everything turns in the quiet leisure of disaster:a kind of innocencea kind of innocence now supernatural darkness floating,trees shaking, waterwaystrees shaking, waterways swollen under a livid sky, storm cloudsforming in the blink of an eye.forming in the blink of an eye. The thought of you is performative: blondehair, pale complexion, downcasthair, pale complexion, downcast jewels for eyes. Your dreadful martyrdomruns its course, written in mudruns its course, written in mud and butter: the human instant, in whichyou sing yourself full-throated.you sing yourself full-throated. Honey, ginger, flared saffron, graywhitemomentous rhythm of sea,momentous rhythm of sea, barbarous smell of wet earth, ransackingor ravaged flowers, the landfillor ravaged flowers, the landfill site, shit-hole, killing ground from which we supas shaking, hiccuping drunks.as shaking, hiccuping drunks. To forfeit wisdom, atone for sins undone:the allegoricalthe allegorical hand thrust into torture, noise, shadowsof men. Between the lines,of men. Between the lines, against the clock, this does not make,does not make a difference to them.does not make a difference to them. This age [our age] demands an image of itsouraccelerated grimace   accelerated grimace    an old bitch gone in the teeth, the ultimatecunt   our botchedcunt   our botched civilization, our grave in the sky: last jizzof consciousness.of consciousness. I could have, now, blown my fucking brains out,but for a sweet shimmer of reason,but for a sweet shimmer of reason, blood, lone bells in gritty belfries, the shallowsof the sea, the surprise of daysof the sea, the surprise of days which slide under sunlight, the soulgathered up, exhaled as rings of smoke.gathered up, exhaled as rings of smoke. Clay is the word and clay is the flesh. Youdrape your body againstdrape your body against my body, like a sheet of mirrored glass;you remain, comme le dityou remain, comme le ditcomme le ditFlaubert, melancholique devant son r ve accompli.Flaubert, melancholique devant son r ve accompli   The word  red  is not.   The word  red  is not. Forever in lust, forever in heat of fire and flood.Mule-bray, pig-grunt, bawdyMule-bray, pig-grunt, bawdy cackle and the stomping of feet to the beatof some undone family portraitof some undone family portrait   bad teeth, bad eyes, beer and paint cans   the name and date split in soft slate.the name and date split in soft slate. Money makes an inverse differenceto distance, when I lift her backto distance, when I lift her back to me now: nothing there but that palecurly head, workingcurly head, working a machine up and down, an ochreautumn merging into twilight.autumn merging into twilight. I read much of the night. Guns click and spitand split up timber, untiland split up timber, until the river s tent is broken: old kettles, oldbottles, a broken can, old iron,bottles, a broken can, old iron, old bones, old rags, that raving slutwho kept the till.who kept the till. Dreams nourished with tears, the sweet kinksof fists, light rain falling as mist.of fists, light rain falling as mist. The hours after you are gone are a leadwhite morning of  hard, new ice,white morning of  hard, new ice, the snow drift of that which is left unspoken.Care and great sadness are both a burden.Care and great sadness are both a burden. No gods, but a black swastika and no skybut grinding water, gaspingbut grinding water, gasping wind, the wares of carthage, girlswith peacock eyes. The churnwith peacock eyes. The churn of stale words staining the heart again:bleached wood massed as bones.bleached wood massed as bones. Your body is white as anemone petals,your skin is stone smooth, weyour skin is stone smooth, we [as cold as the dead they loadlike a pile of  baskets, moundlike a pile of  baskets, mound of refuse, the sweepings of a street]are pressed close together, swaying.are pressed close together, swaying. Merely the despaired occasion of wordshedmade keener by blessed rage.made keener by blessed rage. Scrape away the prison coating, the itchysea; drink from this glasssea; drink from this glass of pure, real, resplendent blood, itsmalediction, freshly soiled and snug.malediction, freshly soiled and snug. It s a question of altitude, probably, walkingalong your eyelid again, towardsalong your eyelid again, towards your tear duct. This dance of firethat touches our lips, scorchesthat touches our lips, scorches our tongues and pulls out the thinbeaten tin of my squally voice.beaten tin of my squally voice. O technosociety, where memory is tolerated,barely, as real estatebarely, as real estate on which to mount steeples of rust, layfresh mowed grass, burn gasoline:fresh mowed grass, burn gasoline: anything so long as there s a marginand little but commerce between us.and little but commerce between us. We never have pure space in front of us, rather:slight bondage, the world s halter,slight bondage, the world s halter, this fashion for dressing or setting our hairablaze until we re ash and ashablaze until we re ash and ash in the heat of a blank but infinitely scrollingscreen, flared back to scratch.screen, flared back to scratch. We begin and end with a groan, the tongue scomfortable wetness, surenesscomfortable wetness, sureness of soul and fluttering lips. Then:lords of unquiet, quiet sojourn,lords of unquiet, quiet sojourn, each atom which belongs to youbelongs to me.belongs to me. All abandoned, the last rig broken, the staggeringshadows of trees, fence posts, guttedshadows of trees, fence posts, gutted cars, faces blurred and Sienese grave.I wish that I could speak onlyI wish that I could speak only of  it all, the voices of children singing.A chapel, in spite of  it all.A chapel, in spite of  it all.

Woman was made to serve and obey man, Man must obey God. Wife: man can command. A natural order, God's ordained plan; A woman must bow down to her husband.        England needs an heir so I must marryEngland needs an heir so I must marry       But yet I prevaricate and tarry. A Queen when she weds is suddenly less, The elevated bridegroom now soars high. The prize: Kingship and a Queen to undress, To win this all men would flatter and lie.        Robert Dudley calls me and I long to go,Robert Dudley calls me and I long to go,        For I am soft and made of melting snow. Once wedded the Queen is precarious, At the mercy and caprice of the King. Childbirth deadly, bloody and dangerous, The dire consequence of mortal loving.        A virgin Queen I am and will remain.A virgin Queen I am and will remain.        No man commands: I rule, ever the same.

I thought to write an elegy as  reply to your questions to pitch the word as far forward like a dolphin out of the sea over a threshold, to behold the land as practical and green as this table, a space to write and walk into like a kitchen hearing the conjuct vowels what does a reader suppose if not the promise of a text the ultimate form at the end of a chain of forms infinite summed to a singular value the elegy as a place to begin.

I first discovered what was killing these men. I had three sons who worked with their father in the tunnel: Cecil, aged 23, Owen, aged 21, Shirley, aged 17. They used to work in a coal mine, not steady work for the mines were not going much of the time. A power Co. foreman learned that we made home brew, he formed a habit of dropping in evenings to drink, persuading the boys and my husband   give up their jobs and take this other work. It would pay them better. Shirley was my youngest son; the boy. He went into the tunnel.     My heart     my mother     my heart     my mother     My heart     my mother     my heart     my mother      My heart     my coming into being. My husband is not able to work. He has it, according to the doctor. We have been having a very hard time making a living since this trouble came to us. I saw the dust in the bottom of the tub. The boy worked there about eighteen months, came home one evening with a shortness of breath. He said,  Mother, I cannot get my breath.  Shirley was sick about three months. I would carry him from his bed to the table, from his bed to the porch, in my arms.     My heart is mine in the place of hearts,     My heart is mine in the place of hearts,      They gave me back my heart, it lies in me. When they took sick, right at the start, I saw a doctor. I tried to get Dr. Harless to X-ray the boys. He was the only man I had any confidence in, the company doctor in the Kopper s mine, but he would not see Shirley. He did not know where his money was coming from. I promised him half if he d work to get compensation, but even then he would not do anything. I went on the road and begged the X-ray money, the Charleston hospital made the lung pictures, he took the case after the pictures were made. And two or three doctors said the same thing. The youngest boy did not get to go down there with me, he lay and said,  Mother, when I die,  I want you to have them open me up and  see if that dust killed me.  Try to get compensation,  you will not have any way of making your living  when we are gone,  and the rest are going too.       I have gained mastery over my heart  I have gained mastery over my heart      I have gained mastery over my two hands      I have gained mastery over the waters      I have gained mastery over the river. The case of my son was the first of the line of lawsuits. They sent the lawyers down and the doctors down; they closed the electric sockets in the camps. There was Shirley, and Cecil, Jeffrey and Oren, Raymond Johnson, Clev and Oscar Anders, Frank Lynch, Henry Palf, Mr. Pitch, a foreman; a slim fellow who carried steel with my boys, his name was Darnell, I believe. There were many others, the towns of Glen Ferris, Alloy, where the white rock lies, six miles away; Vanetta, Gauley Bridge, Gamoca, Lockwood, the gullies, the whole valley is witness. I hitchhike eighteen miles, they make checks out. They asked me how I keep the cow on $2. I said one week, feed for the cow, one week, the children s flour. The oldest son was twenty-three. The next son was twenty-one. The youngest son was eighteen. They called it pneumonia at first. They would pronounce it fever. Shirley asked that we try to find out. That s how they learned what the trouble was.      I open out a way, they have covered my sky with crystal I open out a way, they have covered my sky with crystal      I come forth by day, I am born a second time,      I force a way through, and I know the gate      I shall journey over the earth among the living.      He shall not be diminished, never;      I shall give a mouth to my son.  

          1   Down the long library each marble bust shines unregarded through a shower of dust where a grim ghost paces for exercise in wet weather: nausea, gout,  some days I hardly think it worth my time to rise . Not even the love of friends can quite appease the vertigo, sore ears and inner voices; deep-draughted rain clouds, a rock lost in space, yahoos triumphant in the marketplace, the isle is full of intolerable noises.             2   Go with the flow; no, going against the grain he sits in his rocking chair with a migraine, a light in the church all day till evensong, the sort of day in which a man might hang. No riding out to bubbling stream and weir, to the moist meadow and white belvedere; on tattling club and coffee house a pox, a confederacy of dunces and mohocks   scholars and saints be d-mn d, slaves to a hard reign and our own miniature self-regard.             3   We emerge from hibernation to ghetto-blasters much better than our old Sony transistors, consensual media, permanent celebration, share options, electronic animation, wave motion of site-specific daffodils, closed-circuit video in the new hotels; for Niamh and Ois n have come to earth once more with blinding breastplate and tempestuous hair, new festive orthodoxy and ironic icon, their faces lit up like the Book of Kells.             4   Defrosting the goose-skin on Bridget s daughters spring sunlight sparkles among parking meters, wizards on stilts, witches on circus bikes, jokers and jugglers, twitching plastic snakes, pop music of what happens, throbbing skies, star wars, designer genes, sword sorceries. We ve no nostalgia for the patristic croziers, fridges and tumble-dryers of former years, rain-spattered cameras in O Connell St., the sound mikes buffeted by wind and sleet              5   but this is your birthday and I want to recall a first-floor balcony under a shower of hail where our own rowdy crowd stood to review post-Christian gays cavorting up Fifth Avenue, wise-cracking dialogue as quick and dry as that in The Big Sleep or The Long Goodbye;The Big Sleep The Long Goodbye for we too had our season in T r na n g, a Sacred Heart girl and a Protestant rogue, chill sunshine warming us to the very bone, our whole existence one erogenous zone.             6   I could resign these structures and devices, these fancy flourishes and funny voices to a post-literate, audio-visual realm of uncial fluorescence, song and film, as curious symptoms of a weird transition before we opted to be slaves of fashion   for now, whatever the ancestral dream, we give ourselves to a vast corporate scheme where our true wit is devalued once again, our solitude known only to the rain.             7   The one reality is the perpetual flow, chaos of complex systems. Each generation does what it must; middle age and misanthropy, like famine and religion, make poor copy, and even the present vanishes like snow off a rope, frost off a ditch, ice in the sun   so back to the desktop and the drawing board, prismatic natural light, slow-moving cloud, the waves far-thundering in a life of their own, a young woman hitching a lift on a country road.   

Walking at El Pulguero, a tarp shines next to the dog track. The dog track a bowl similar to the Colosseum, but with steel poles subdividing the voyeurs and attending bidders, tickets yellow and flapping in their hands. Greyhounds on the billboards    ...     I walk under the stands. Bracelets in a jumble under the black- marker-scribbled advertisement brown board. It exemplifies the innocent rebuttal to being cultured by my particular country    the country of my birth, though not quite my teaching. The Cuba of the womb, of the in-walking-distance- of-the-beach land in my memory, with shouts beside our houses at the corner belonging to the distribution agency. Fruits, mangoes, milk, soy beef, when that traveled our way, divided and partitioned by an old minibus with a man in an apron and a smudged baby blue shirt. I remember soda bottles being carried off up our streets, but by who I don t remember. Too vintage a memory to properly retell. Orangey glued to the burn of sunset on time that young inside    I as well draw from that very same exclusion, a pleasure from this participating memory. My childhood was a happy one, albeit the pangs existed, sharp like a battery, violent, sorrowful, but elastic, coming back at night home, be it dark inside the house. This indictment, the personal exclusion goes timid up my skin and neck.             At the Pulguero             or not, I ll find something to bother about. It is that time, turbulent and worrisome until later. It is just not only this place. And so I reap              from the crystalline sky,              the mangled trees,              the faux marble and jet              furniture with gold              filigree forming a subtle              Chinese dragon what I can. The gold iron floor lamps. The off-brand running shoes    Fila, but not really. Always apart from what includes me. Vaguely includes me, is chummy enough, falling out of the tether when more incisive probing corners along. And so in my cooperation- less demeanor, I shuffle further into the flea market, never benefitting from the seductive resignation of allowing everything a true potential buying power.        The baby marmoset gurgles when belly-rubbed. Deserted by its mother, the video lector tells us. The YouTube bubble incarnadine in the corner. A hibiscus, a bee dropping from its flight. One dreams it could be okay to keep the little monkey for an alarm clock in the a.m.            A gang of marmosets            intertwines among the branches.            The ground heaves an ash coloring.            I bogey my apprehensions            on the little primates flinging.            Bug-eyed, I read            their spastic jerking            as uncohesive            with my stock of reality.       The stony wheel gurgling in its solar pickling. Moss underhand, the water running its cataracts of limpid murk. The wheel has cracks in the stony center.       A frittata offered to us by a resident. He s a culinary student. It was surplus practice. And oats on the bread loaves also in the offer. He s a kind gentleman, toughened by who knows what. He s staying here at the shelter and I m too coward to ask about his life. Like a scouter of fumy           billows, we all happen upon the hits which we must report to someone. And god knows how they ll take it.       I listen in on the praxis applied to the nexus in accelerating, intimate make-out fondling. I feel it with every go at the mouth and lips, teeth testing their courtship at submittal, effusive biting.       The phone shelly, an onyx coat           warm in the jacket pocket. A regulator s annual finish like a yearling passerine flickering on the computer           screen.

I was reading Jeffrey Goldberg s new piece In The Atlantic   it was the one aboutThe Atlantic President Obama s decision not To be persuaded by a commonplace That our credibility hinges on the use Of swift and massive lethal force despite Pressure even from his own Cabinet Appalled that Assad shelled Ghouta with sarin gas    When I thought of your poem on the way Of denial,  Via Negativa,  whose lines Celebrated their (your rhyme) reticence. Why am I even talking this way to you? I watched you being buried, yet in the end I wonder if I had ever been your friend.

As soon as I step into the tunnel that will take me under the river I need to cross to get to the city my brain shuts down.  No signal gets through and the question remains how do I know?   With a brain well emptied, and a head a vacuum of nothing, everything I ve ever known goes quietly absent.  As still and as quiet as a house abandoned or a mouth wide open in a painting.   As soon as I step out of the tunnel scientists squabble about when we should abandon the earth for some other place.  I duck straight back into the tunnel in order to disrupt the signal.   In the tunnel's shelter there is nothing in my head, it's empty enough For the origins of the universe to begin.  A frightening thing interrupted by my backing back out of the tunnel just in time.   In the light of day what's on my mind turns out to be your lifespan. Next to the tunnel is the only safe place to be.  It is the only place where it's certain I ll not all day not need to be crying and weeping to go on.   Which draws me directly back into the tunnel to interrupt the signal. It takes a little while for my mind to stop trembling.

Food in the underworld, the Death King   In his seedy, green nightgown Holding up flowers.   The warden of the underworld In her plastic, pink   Wheelchair Serving silver trays of   Shit and death and black Gelatinous.   Birth, the music Reminds me and   Will not stop When I turn it off,   A warped music boxTrapped inside. Trapped inside.    I repeat what I cannot bear: Chronic repetition.   This poem is its own Language.   It marks the mind Like a missing memory   Marks the body. Then it Changes, makes it invisible.   Back form the edge of what Becomes.  

But unfortunately it can only travel into the future at a rate of one second per second,   which seems slow to the physicists and to the grant committees and even to me.   But I manage to get there, time after time, to the next moment and to the next.   Thing is, I can't turn it off. I keep zipping ahead  well not zipping And if I tryzipping   to get out of this time machine, open the latch, I'll fall into space, unconscious,   then desiccated! And I'm pretty sure I'm afraid of that. So I stay inside.   There's a window, though. It shows the past. It's like a television or fish tank.   But it's never live; it's always over. The fish swim in backward circles.   Sometimes it's like a rearview mirror, another chance to see what I'm leaving behind,   and sometimes like blackout, all that time wasted sleeping.   Myself age eight, whole head burnt with embarrassment at having lost a library book.   Myself lurking in a candled corner expecting to be found charming.   Me holding a rose though I want to put it down so I can smoke.   Me exploding at my mother who explodes at me because the explosion   of some dark star all the way back struck hard at mother's mother's mother.   I turn away from the window, anticipating a blow. I thought I'd find myself   an old woman by now, traveling so light in time. But I haven't gotten far at all.   Strange not to be able to pick up the pace as I'd like; the past is so horribly fast.

the porcelain cup is similar to my skull. when i grasp the cup firmly with my hand an arm out of nowhere sprouts on my arm like a graft and the hand on that arm raises the porcelain cup high and hurls it to the wooden floor. since that arm is safeguarding the porcelain cup the thing that is broken into pieces then is my skull that is similar to the porcelain cup. even if my arm had moved before the graft-arm slid into my arm like a snake the white paper that warded off flood would have ripped. yet my arm continues to safeguard the porcelain cup.Translated from the KoreanTranslated from the KoreanTranslated from the Korean

b-boy Wordsworth beatbox vocal cord code switching through the wheat fields at daybreak clicking his teeth against the corn s high yellow thighs prying open like the sunlight s tear ducts on the morning the moon forgot how to speak TwiTwi the cicadas having screeched all night in Old EnglishOld English like a man who has forgotten his name calling out the leaves of grass as though stalks of letters at right angles have meaning a way of theorizing the rhetoric of beauty a fig tree trembling at the rain s hungry lick a finch weaving myth into a nested crown of logic the wildflowers  arms on dial-up internet a virgin using the petals as her service providerhe loves me, he loves me not, with every flick of her wristhe loves me, he loves me not the wind knowing the typeface her lips are set in pockmark cheeks peppered with salt the politics of resentment seasoning the spittletrue poems flee like a slave in Mississippitrue poems flee Googling  home  with no filter or cookies the tuning fork having shorted in the eardrum s mouth the devil was in the details when he read the star s hands prongs of a serpent s embrace, steam dancing on a cloud s rolled tongue, wet and pregnant with words so soft the dirt could swallow the sound what must we remember, to forget how we were born? when we ask for advice it is rather for permission for we know not what we do when we do it in free will a robot puts a conch shell to its lips and blows a man puts a seashell to his ear and hears the ocean tell a lie long enough and it will surely turn to truth

The helicopter, a sort of controlled silver leaf dropped lightly into the clearing. The searchlights swung, the little girl, the little girl was crying, her mother, a girl herself, was giving birth, the forest dropped birdseeds of milk. Then the helicopter lifted away, the mother rested.                                      Like him who came to us empty-handed, who came, it seemed, with nothing, Joseph Cornell           making a shoebox universe to put it all in.  

in Fort Wayne I drank the seniors        Old Milwaukeedrank the seniors         Old Crow         in Indianapolis I stopped         now I regret every drink I never took        all around          coffee grounds and eggshells      this sweating         a mouthful of  lime        as a boy I stole a mint green bra from a laundromat       I took it home to try on while my parents slept       filled its cups with the smallest turnips in our pantry       the underwire grew into me like a strangler fig       my blood roiled then as now       back on earth frogspit is dripping down wild aloe spikes       salmon are bullying their way upstream       there is a pond I leapt into once with a lonely blonde boy       when we scampered out one of us was in love      I could not be held responsible for desire       he could not be held at all     I wonder where he is now       if he looked up he might see me      a sparkling     I always hoped that when I died I would know why        my brother will be so sad      he will tell his daughter I was better than I was     he will leave out my crueldrunk nights       the wet mattresses      my driving alone into cornfields unsure whether I d drive out       I wish he were here now        he could be here      this cave is big enough for everyone        look at all the diamonds

i knew you before you had a mother, when you were newtlike, swimming, a horrible brain in water. i knew you when your connections belonged only to yourself, when you had no history to hook on to, barnacle, when you had no sustenance of metal when you had no boat to travel when you stayed in the same place, treading the question; i knew you when you were all eyes and a cocktail, blank as they sky of a mind, a root, neither ground nor placental; not yet red with the cut nor astonished by pain, one terrible eye open in the center of your head to night, turning, and the stars blinked like a cat.   we swam in the last trickle of champagne before we knew breastmilk we shared the night of the closet, the parasitic closing on our thumbprint, we were smudged in a yellow book. son, we were oak without mouth, uncut, we were brave before memory.

I was here before the blackamoors      were photographed & cataloged,          when they first ran up to me & then receded into their poses,      descendants of archival Hamites          destined to serve their brothers & sisters in a red baroque room,      each silent as an iron doorstop.          Some peered out of perches askance, shining lanterns & sconces,      ready to please, or eager to cast          a guiding light among centuries of shadows, a patina of mystery      lost in Tuscan dusk. At least          their attire isn t stitched rags. If ebony & alabaster could talk,      Lord, the volumes of gossip          among  gold-leafed tributes we would hear as vinegar turns      back to wine, driftwood to bread.          They ve been perfectly arranged, & almost reveal whose sweat      glosses their smooth skin          in these rooms of rehearsal. I saw one shift slightly & blink,      or maybe it was a dark hum          coming from the olive grove, a feeling brought across the sea.      They are not claw-footed props          & furniture for drunken nights posed to grab a hat or fur coat,      dressed in skeins of filigree          & false gems, offering a bowl of  black grapes to each envoy      or a guest holding a dagger          behind his upright back.

75.Even with geographic proximity, there may exist temporal
systems such that two people cannot meet one another or will
never meet again.
Dream last night includes swimming. Something about a thick
river, keep riding boats on it, travel from station to station,
temporary home to home. It is Berlin or a group of islands
called "Connecticut." I am alone or have a child or am with
my brother. It is sunset, when one seeks something.
It is possible we somehow die for a time, a year, a month, a day, 
without realizing this, then awake to find ourselves, which is to
say "someone," present again, attentive, expectant, apologetic
even?

I don't want my legs to show   I don't    want   my legs    to show that   I'm willing instead   I ripped my skirt off     the first story     (in which I am featured)         my mother having forgotten the wooden clothespins which were my usual toys     not having them to gum & grip     instead I ripped my skirt off   say    I'm willing more than    so   I'm too    willing so say so   more than say so much    than   I'm willing to    say     I don't want my legs to show    but my breasts are available      not motion but gravity     the steadfast pounding   not motion    not pavement   the pounding     the skirt is the uniform    grey & sullen     in school    refusing to   hold a pleat     wet wool on iron steaming     flung   after lying   in snow thighs red & icy     sitting for yearbook pictures smart girls    honor    society   our white   panties showing every one if I show you my legs   won t you see that   I m leaving all life is   a leaning     slow dancing      eyes closed arms raised around his neck   each girl     a view for some other girl s partner     they are not the feature    the breasts hide the heart or disclose it    the legs hide the opening   the skirt hides the legs   disguise enclosure in clothes   my mother couldn't understand why I wouldn't wear a slip when standing in the light the outline of my legs   shone   the skirt matters    although it is see- through       fear is a by-product do not be dissuaded   this made more sense than that division into love & fear   I began to see fear   as a curtain    a scrim substantive as light   evasive & theatrical but light     as a curtain it need not be skirted   a skirt may be ripped    shredded   or moved easily aside it need not be violated   it can be adjusted

Balance is everything, is the only way to hold on. I've weighed the alternatives, the hold as harbor: It isn't safe                                                                              to let go. But consider the hover,  choices made, the momentBalance is everything, is the only way to hold on. I've weighed the alternatives, the hold as harbor: It isn't safe                                                                              to let go. But consider the hover, between later and too late. Hesitation is later, regret too late. You can't keep turning and turning, or expecting to return. This earth is not a wheel, it is a rock that erodes, mountain by mountain. And I have been too soft, like sandstone, but there is a point where I stand without a story, immutable and moved, solid as a breath in winter air. I have seen my death and I know it is my neighbor, my brother, my keeper. In my life I am going to keep trying for the balance, remembering the risks and the value of extremes, and that experience teaches the length of allowable lean; that it is easier   and wiser   to balance a stone as if on one toe though it weigh a hundred pounds than to push it back against the curve of its own world.  

How does one grow the cojones to celebrate a Fudgsicle? I ll tell you, and won t begin by mentioning trellises forsooth. The items on the register are mechanisms inscrutable, yes. But they sway in the doubled-up air with a sense of lucidity, A kind of gong affect that chiggers as it steamrolls forth, Appraisals for unchintziest bling. Time for a sea change. Your turn, and this means you Come with me. Agreeable and mute, like the original Doppelg nger, or as we in my neighborhood called it The Doppler Radar. On school mornings, a trust fund in my teeth, High yacht vanilla swilled my parents  bed. I would be multiple and exact. From that vantage, a windpipe brought forth On invisible horseback to the sick child s bed. I m sure you can t quite imagine it, ember In the tabby lobby. But I could. I arrested it. Gershwin and American Airlines and I could always Tell the voice without the face, God s gift to me For being lame in phlegmatic tissue. O parabola. Look at the ashtrays! There they are. Swinging, roiling, Ocean-choppy, a gauntlet of remote controls, Paint supplies all stacked up with nowhere to go In the corner of a grave illness   like pink paint. This forecast of centenarians in Florida, and Burbank. All my life I wanted a fractal tie and strawberry apron. Now I m a Church lady, no hint of arthritic condition. My name isn t Sallie or Mae, it s Sallie Mae. Millions of tiny pendants, Waterford crystal, bubbling From local tree-fort where boys grope one another. Will you come with me for Pilates at Fort Ticonderoga? Denise Austin is here. Stretch in the sun. Champagne woods, lakes chasms, dismounts. Then you say: You have no idea what I lived through. The Green Mountain Boys were like a second dad to me.

